------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Superscripted
characters are note with ‘^’, and, if necessary, multiple characters are
enclosed in ‘{}’.

Topic headings, referenced in the Table of Contents, appear as marginal
notes, [Sidenote: Topic].

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.




                         A HISTORY OF CRITICISM

                           AND LITERARY TASTE




    _Ignorantium temeraria plerumque sunt judicia._
                                                   —POLYCARP LEYSER.

                         A HISTORY OF CRITICISM

                                  AND

                        LITERARY TASTE IN EUROPE

              _FROM THE EARLIEST TEXTS TO THE PRESENT DAY_




                                   BY

                           GEORGE SAINTSBURY
                     M.A. OXON.; HON. LL.D. ABERD.
          PROFESSOR OF RHETORIC AND ENGLISH LITERATURE IN THE
                        UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH




                            IN THREE VOLUMES

                               VOL. III.

                            MODERN CRITICISM




                       WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS
                          EDINBURGH AND LONDON
                                 MCMIV




                                PREFACE.


In the first volume of this History we had to summarise the critical
work of nearly two thousand years; in the second, that of two whole
centuries, with the major part of that of the third. In this we have had
the apparently more manageable task of considering the whole work of the
nineteenth century only, with the _remanets_ (left over, not by accident
but design) from the eighteenth and earlier. Yet it would be a poor
compliment to the reader’s intelligence to waste time in explaining to
him that the weight of the task is very little lightened by the lessened
number of the years with which we have to deal. And the actual
congestion of the volume ought all the less to be increased by
repetition of things already said in former Prefaces, or by single-stick
play with reviewers. Some points, which seemed to be really worth
handling, I have dealt with in the text; the others I must let alone. I
have little fear that many impartial and competent critics will dispute
my claim to have surveyed the matter with the actual documents in hand,
and not (save in the rare cases specified) from comments and
go-betweens, from abstracts and translations; while such critics may
even grant my “mass,” as some indeed have in their kindness granted it
already, a fair share of “agitating mind,” under the conditions and with
the limitations specified in the original preface. I may at least hope
that I shall not be charged with

                                              “la fretta
               Che l’onestade ad ogni atto dismaga,”

in regard to a book which has been the actual work and companion of
seven years in its composition, the result of more than seven-and-twenty
in direct or indirect preparation.

After all it is, as Dante says elsewhere, for knowledge “not to prove
but to set forth its subject,” and I do not see any further necessity to
argue against the notion that Criticism, alone of the departments of
literary energy, is to be denied a simple and straightforward History of
its actual accomplishments. That is what I set myself to give. If other
people want other things, let them go and do them. When the next History
of Criticism is written it will doubtless be, if the author knows his
business, a much better book than mine; but I may perhaps hope that his
might be worse, and would certainly cost him more time and labour, were
it not for this.

One final point I think it may be well to take up. A friend who is at
once friendly, most competent, and of a different complexion in critical
thought, objected to me that I “treat literature as something by
itself.” I hastened to admit the impeachment, and to declare that this
is the very postulate of my book. That literature can be _absolutely_
isolated is, of course, not to be thought of; nothing human can be
absolutely isolated from the general conditions of humanity, and from
the other functions and operations thereof. But in that _comparative_
isolation and separate presentation which Aristotle meant by his caution
against confusion of kinds, I do thoroughly believe. With which
profession of faith, and with all renewed acknowledgments to friends and
helpers, especially to Professors Elton, Ker, and Raleigh for their
kindness in reading the proofs of this volume, I must leave the book to
its fate.[1]

                                                  GEORGE SAINTSBURY.

HOLMBURY ST MARY, _Lammas 1904_.




                        ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA.

                                -------

                               VOLUME I.

P. 63, note. “_Lu_dhaus” should be “_Su_dhaus.” I received from
Professor Gudeman of Cornell University, along with the notice of this
misprint, and some other minor corrections which I gratefully
acknowledge, a large number of much more important animadversions, for
noticing which generally I may make it a pretext. I have the highest
respect for their author: and it is quite natural that to him, as a
professed and professional classical philologist, my treatment should in
many respects seem superficial, or amateurish, or even positively wrong.
But on at least one point we are, I fear, irreconcilable. Professor
Gudeman thinks that Kaibel has “settled once for all” the question of
the Περὶ Ὕψους,—has “given incontrovertible proof” that it cannot be
later than the first century. Now, as an old student of Logic and of
Law, and as a literary critic of thirty years’ standing, I absolutely
deny the possibility of “settling once for all,” of “incontrovertible
proof,” in this matter as in many others. The evidence is not extant, if
it is existent. It may turn up, but it has not turned up yet. On this
point—the point as to what constitutes _literary_ evidence and what does
not—I am well aware that I am at issue, perhaps with the majority, at
any rate with a large number, of scholars in the ancient and modern
languages; but I am quite content to remain so. As to another protest of
Professor Gudeman’s against my neglect of the latest editions, I might
refer him to Schopenhauer (_v. infra_, p. 567); but I will only say that
_for my purpose_ the date of an edition is of very little importance,
and the spelling of “_G_næus” or “_C_næus,” “_iu_ris” or “_ju_ris,” of
no importance at all. I am sorry to appear stiff-necked in reference to
criticisms made with many obliging expressions, but _Ich kann nicht
anders_, as also in reference to Theophrastus, the Alexandrians, and
others, whose substantive works are lost, but with whom Mr Gudeman would
like me to deal in the usual manner of conjectural and inferential
patchwork.

P. 280. I had not observed (oddly enough) that _Clæris_ had crept into
text and headings, where it has no business, and that “Fabius” was
misprinted “Falinus,” till Professor Gudeman kindly brought both to my
notice.

Pp. 410, 411. I owe to Dr Sandys (in _Hermathena_, vol. xii. p. 438) the
removal of certain ignorances or forgetfulnesses here. “Solymarius,” as
I most assuredly ought to have remembered, seeing that the information
is in Warton, was a poem on the Crusades by Gunther, the author of the
better known _Ligurinus_ on Barbarossa, and the “Guntero” to whom I
myself, in vol. ii. p. 96, alluded in connection with Patrizzi.
“Paraclitus” and “Sidonius” were two poems by Warnerius of Basle. I am
even more indebted to Dr Sandys for a sheaf of privately communicated
annotations on vol. i., of many of which I hope to avail myself in a
future edition—if such a thing is called for.

                               VOLUME II.

P. 23 _sq._ A reference of Hallam’s (_Literature of Europe_, iii. 5, 76,
77) to the _Miscellanies_ of Politian has led some critics, who
apparently do not know the book itself, and have not even read Hallam
carefully, to object to its omission here. Their authority might have
saved them; for he very correctly describes these _Miscellanies_ as
“sometimes grammatical, but more frequently relating to obscure customs
and mythological allusions.” In other words, the book—which _I_ have
read—is hardly, in my sense, critical at all.

P. 29, note 3, l. 3, _for_ “ii.” _read_ “i.” (The _first_ vol. of Pope.)

P. 30, _for_ “with his two great disciples” _read_ “between his master
Horace and his pupil Boileau.”

P. 38, note, _for first sentence read_: “But most of this latter part
had been written in 1548-49, and all must have been before 1550, when T.
died.”

P. 51, l. 7 from bottom, _for_ “Rote” _read_ “Rota.”

P. 67, l. 4, _for_ “prose” _read_ “poor.”

P. 80, note. When I wrote on Castelvetro I was not aware that the
Commentary on Dante (at least that on _Inf._, Cantos i.-xxix.) had been
recovered and published by Signor Giovanni Franciosi (Modena, 1886) in a
stately royal 4to (which I have now read, and possess), with the owl and
the pitcher, but without the _Kekrika_, and without the proper
resolution in the owl’s countenance. This may be metaphysically
connected with the fact that the editor is rather unhappy about his
author, and tells us that he was long in two minds about sending him out
at last to the world. He admires Castelvetro’s boldness, scholarship,
intellect; but thinks him sadly destitute of reverence for Dante, and
deplores his “lack of lively and cheerful sense of the Beautiful.” If it
were not that my gratitude to the man who gives me a text seals my mouth
as to everything else, I should be a little inclined to cry “Fudge!” at
this. Nobody would expect from any Renaissance scholar, and least of all
from Castelvetro, “unction,” mysticism, rapture at the things that give
_us_ rapture in Dante. All the more honour to him that, as in the case
of Petrarch, he thought it worth while to bestow on that vernacular,
which too many Renaissance scholars despised, the same intense desire to
understand, the same pains, the same “taking seriously,” which he showed
towards the ancients. This is the true reverence: the rest is but
“leather and prunella.”

P. 87, l. 5, _for_ “ideals” _read_ “idols.”

P. 107. Some time after vol. ii. was published I came across (in the
catalogues of Mr Voynich, who might really inscribe on these documents
for motto

                         “Das Unzulängliche
                         Hier wird’s Ereignis”)

quite a nest of Zinanos, mostly written about that year 1590, which
seems to have been this curious writer’s most active time; and I bought
two of them as specially appurtenant to our subject. One is a _Discorso
della Tragedia_, appended (though separately paged and dedicated) to the
author’s tragedy of _Almerigo_; the other _Le Due Giornate della Ninfa
overo del Diletto e delle Muse_, all printed by Bartholi, at Reggio, and
the two prose books or booklets dated 1590. The _Discorso_ is chiefly
occupied with an attack on the position that Tragedy (especially
according to Aristotle) ought to be busied with true subjects only. The
_Giornate_ (which contain another reference to Patrizzi) deal—more or
less fancifully, but in a manner following Boethius, which is
interesting at so late a date—with philosophy and things in general,
rather than with literature.

P. 140, l. 3 from bottom, _delete_ “of” before Catullus.

P. 162, l. 17. “Thomas” should have been “George,” as it appears
correctly elsewhere: and “fourth” in the note should be “quarto” (“4th,”
“4to”).

P. 191. “_Topmost_ Verulam” should, of course, be “_large-browed_
Verulam”—a curious instance of the tricks played by memory. I know _The
Palace of Art_ so well as to see it all printed before me; but the
treacherous mind’s eye must have slipped from the epithet of the first
line, “topmost _oriels_,” to the name of the third.

P. 248. In the line beginning _O, débile raison!_ “lors” has been
misprinted for “ores,” thereby spoiling the metre.

P. 263, l. 12, _for_ “Beni—Pacius” _read_ “Beni and Pazzi (Pacius) as
well as of Heinsius.”

P. 301, note, “Grands Écrivains _Français_” should be “G. E. _de la
France_.”

P. 319, note. Gibert is, it seems, appended to some edd. of Baillet.

P. 322, bk. IV. chap. i. I ought, perhaps, to have noticed in this
context a book rather widely spread—Sorel’s _De La Connaissance des Bons
Livres_, Paris, 1671. It contains some not uninteresting things on
literature in general, on novels, poetry, comedy, &c., on the laws of
good speaking and writing, on the “new language of French.” But it is,
on the whole, as anybody acquainted with any part of the voluminous work
of the author of _Francion_ would expect, mainly not disagreeable nor
ignorant _chat_—newspaper work before the newspaper.

P. 350. The opposition of the two “doctors” is perhaps too sharply put.

P. 376, note, _for_ “Schenck” _read_ “Strunk.”

P. 436. I should like to add as a special “place” for Dennis’s
criticism, his comparatively early _Remarks on_ Prince Arthur _and
Virgil_ (title abbreviated), London, 1696. It is, as it stands, of some
elaboration; but its author tells us that he “meant” to do things which
would have made it an almost complete Poetic from his point of view. It
is pervaded with that refrain of “this _ought_ to be” and “that _must_
have been” to which I have referred in the text; and bristles with
purely arbitrary preceptist statements, such as that Criticism cannot be
ill-natured because Good Nature in man cannot be contrary to Justice and
Reason; that a man must not like what he ought not to like—a doctrine
underlying, of course, the whole Neo-classic teaching, and not that
only; almost literally cropping up in Wordsworth; and the very
formulation, in categorical-imperative, of La Harpe’s “monstrous
beauty.” The book (in which poet and critic are very comfortably and
equally yoked together) is full of agreeable things; and may possibly
have suggested one of Swift’s most exquisite pieces of irony in its
contention that Mr Blackmore’s Celestial Machines are directly contrary
to the Doctrine of the Church of England.

P. 449, l. 1, _for_ “is more curious” _read_ “gives rather more.”

P. 478, l. 12 from bottom, _for_ “and in some cases” _read_ “in the
lady’s case.”

P. 546. Denina. This author is a good instance of the things which the
reader sometimes rather reproachfully demands, when the writer would
only too fain have supplied them. I could write more than a page with
satisfaction on Denina’s _Discorso sopra le Vicende della Litteratura_,
which, rather surprisingly, underwent its second edition in Glasgow at
the Foulis press (1763), and which not only deals at large with the
subject in an interesting manner, but accepts the _religio loci_ by
dealing specially with _Scottish_ literature. But, once more, this is
for a fourth volume—or even a fifth—things belonging to the
Thinkable-Unthinkable.

P. 550, note. Something like “pie” has been made of this. It should
read: “This Gallicism was _not_ universal. _As_ Mr Ticknor,” &c.

P. 554, l. 3. For the _Paragone_ see the present volume under Conti,
Antonio.

                              VOLUME III.

P. 152, note, l. 6 from bottom, _for_ “condenses” _read_ “condemns.”

P. 173, l. 11, _for_ “he” _read_ “Spenser.”

P. 208, ll. 1, 2, _for_ “moon_light_” _read_ “moon_shine_.”

P. 254, note, _add_, “as well as sometimes on Southey.”

P. 267, l. 4. I am glad to know that Blake’s poems at least, and at
last, are being edited more than competently.

P. 283, note 2. I accepted too hastily the statement that T. Wright
contributed to the _Retrospective Review_ proper. Dates (see Index) will
show that he could not have done so, though he might to the so-called
“Third” series.

P. 308, l. 8 from bottom, _for_ “Mestre” _read_ “Maistre.”

P. 312, l. 24, _for_ “nor” _read_ “or.”

P. 357, _for_ “Walder” _read_ “Wälder.”

P. 357, sidenote, _for_ “Geschmack” _read_ “Geschmacks.”

P. 471, l. 1, _for_ “more” _read_ “so.”

P. 488. Perhaps the _most_ remarkable example of this parody-criticism
is Aytoun’a _Firmilian_, an astonishing satire-judgment, not merely of
the actual “Spasmodics,” but of the long-subsequent class, all over
Europe, of whom Dr Ibsen is the chief.




                               CONTENTS.


                               ----------


                               BOOK VII.

                   THE DISSOLVENTS OF NEO-CLASSICISM.


                               CHAPTER I.

                    INTRODUCTORY AND RETROSPECTIVE.

                                                            PAGE
        Scope of the volume                                    3
        The term Modern                                        3
        The origins                                            4
        Need of caution here                                   5
        Case of Butler on Rymer, Denham                        5
        And Benlowes                                           6

                                                            PAGE
        Of Addison and others                                  7
        Of La Bruyère and “_Tout est dit_”                     8
        Of Fénelon and Gravina                                 9
        Of Dryden and Fontenelle                               9
        The more excellent way                                10

                              CHAPTER II.

                     THE RALLY OF GERMANY—LESSING.

        Starting-point of this volume                         11

        Neo-Classic complacency and exclusiveness
          illustrated from Callières                          12

        Béat de Muralt                                        13

        His attention to English                              13

        And to French                                         14

        German Criticism proper                               15

        A glance backward                                     15

        Theobald Hoeck                                        16

        Weckherlin and others                                 17

        Weise, Wernicke, Werenfels, &c.                       17

        Some mutineers: Gryphius and Neumeister               18

        Gottsched once more                                   19

        Bodmer and Breitinger                                 20

        The _Diskurse der Maler_                              21

        Gradual divergence from their stand-point; König
          on “Taste”                                          22

        Main works of the Swiss School                        23

        Breitinger’s _Kritische Dichtkunst_, &c.              24

        Bodmer’s _Von dem Wunderbaren_, &c.                   24

        Special criticisms of both                            26

        Bodmer’s verse criticism                              26

        Their later work in mediæval poetry, and their
          general position                                    27

        The “Swiss-Saxon” quarrel                             27
        The elder Schlegels: Johann Adolf                     29
        Johann Elias                                          30
        Moses Mendelssohn                                     32
        Lessing                                               33
        Some cautions respecting him                          33
        His moral obsession; on _Soliman the Second_          34
        The strictures on Ariosto’s portrait of Alcina        36
        _Hamlet_ and _Semiramis_                              37
        The _Comte d’Essex_, _Rodogune_, _Mérope_             37
        Lessing’s Gallophobia                                 38
        And typomania                                         38
        His study of antiquity more than compensating         39
        And especially of Aristotle                           40
        With whom he combines Diderot                         41
        His deficiencies in regard to mediæval literature     41
        The close of the _Dramaturgie_ and its moral          42
        Miscellaneous specimens of his criticism              44
        His attitude to Æschylus and Aristophanes             46
        Frederic the Great                                    48
        _De la Littérature Allemande_                         49

                              CHAPTER III.

                        THE ENGLISH PRECURSORS.

        The first group                                       53
        Mediæval reaction                                     53
        Gray                                                  54
        Peculiarity of his critical position                  55
        The Letters                                           56
        The _Observations_ on Aristophanes and Plato          59
        The _Metrum_                                          60
        The Lydgate Notes                                     61
        Shenstone                                             63
        Percy                                                 64
        The Wartons                                           66
        Joseph’s _Essay on Pope_                              66
        The _Adventurer_ Essays                               67
        Thomas Warton on Spenser                              68
        His _History of English Poetry_                       70

        Hurd: his Commentary on Addison                       72

        The Horace                                            73

        The Dissertations                                     74

        Other Works                                           75

        The _Letters on Chivalry and Romance_                 75

        Their doctrine                                        76

        His real importance                                   78

        Alleged imperfections of the group                    79

        Studies in Prosody                                    80

        John Mason: his _Power of Numbers_ in Prose and
          Poetry                                              81

        Mitford: his _Harmony of Language_                    83

        Importance of prosodic inquiry                        86

        Sterne and the stop-watch                             86

                              CHAPTER IV.

                   DIDEROT AND THE FRENCH TRANSITION.

        The position of Diderot                               89
        Difficult to authenticate                             90
        But hardly to be exaggerated. His  Impressionism      91
        The Richardson éloge                                  92
        The _Reflections on Terence_                          93
        The Review of the _Lettres d’Amabed_                  94
        The Examination of Seneca                             94
        The quality and eminence of his critical position     95
        Rousseau revisited                                    97
        Madame de Staël                                      100
        Her critical position                                100
        And work                                             100
        The _Lettres sur Rousseau_                           101
        The _Essai sur les Fictions_                         102
        The _De La Littérature_                              102
        The _De l’Allemagne_                                 105
        Her critical achievement: imputed                    107
        And actual                                           108
        Chateaubriand: his difficulties                      109
        His Criticism                                        110
        Indirect                                             111
        And Direct                                           111
        The _Génie du Christianisme_                         112
        Its saturation with literary criticism               113
        Survey and examples                                  114
        Single points of excellence                          116

        And general importance                               117
        Joubert: his reputation                              118
        His literary αὐτάρκεια                               118
        The Law of Poetry                                    119
        More on that subject                                 119
        On Style                                             120
        Miscellaneous Criticisms                             121
        His individual judgments more dubious                122
        The reason for this                                  123
        Additional illustrations                             123
        General remarks                                      125
        The other “Empire Critics”                           126
        Fontanes                                             127
        Geoffroy                                             128
        Dussault                                             129
        Hoffman, Garat, &c.                                  129
        Ginguené                                             130
        M. J. Chénier                                        131
        Lemercier                                            131
        Feletz                                               132
        Cousin                                               133
        Villemain                                            133
        His claims                                           133
        Deductions to be made from them                      134
        Beyle                                                135
        _Racine et Shakespeare_                              136
        His attitude here                                    138
        And elsewhere                                        138
        Nodier                                               139

                               CHAPTER V.

                     ÆSTHETICS AND THEIR INFLUENCE.

        The present chapter itself a kind of excursus        141

        A parabasis on “philosophical” criticism             141

        Modern Æsthetics: their fount in Descartes and its
          branches                                           146

        In Germany: negative as well as positive
          inducements                                        147

        Baumgarten                                           148

        _De Nonnullis ad Poema Pertinentibus_                148

        And its definition of poetry                         148

        The _Aletheophilus_                                  149

        The _Æsthetica_                                      149

        Sulzer                                               150

        Eberhard                                             151

        France: the Père André, his _Essai sur le Beau_      151

        Italy: Vico                                          152

        His literary places                                  152

        The _De Studiorum Ratione_                           153

        The _De Constantia Jurisprudentis_                   153

        The first _Scienza Nuova_                            154

        The second                                           154

        Rationale of all this                                155

        A very great man and thinker, but in pure
          Criticism an influence malign or null              156

        England                                              157

        Shaftesbury                                          157

        Hume                                                 159

        Examples of his critical opinions                    160

        His inconsistency                                    162

        Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful                   163

        The Scottish æsthetic-empirics: Alison               164

        The _Essay on Taste_                                 165

        Its confusions                                       166

        And arbitrary absurdities                            167

        An interim conclusion on the æsthetic matter         168

                              CHAPTER VI.

                        THE STUDY OF LITERATURE.

        Bearings of the chapter                              171
        England                                              171
        The study of Shakespeare                             172
        Of Spenser                                           173
        Chaucer                                              174
        Elizabethan minors                                   174
        Middle and Old English                               175
        Influence of English abroad                          176

        The study of French at home and abroad               177
        Of Italian                                           179
        Especially Dante                                     179
        Of Spanish                                           180
        Especially Cervantes                                 182
        Of German                                            182

        INTERCHAPTER VII.                                    184

                               BOOK VIII.

                    THE RECONSTRUCTION OF CRITICISM.


                               CHAPTER I.

      WORDSWORTH AND COLERIDGE: THEIR COMPANIONS AND ADVERSARIES.

        Wordsworth and Coleridge                             200

        The former’s Prefaces                                201

        That to _Lyrical Ballads_, 1800                      202

        Its history                                          202

        The argument against poetic diction, and even
          against metre                                      203

        The appendix: Poetic Diction again                   204

        The Minor Critical Papers                            204

        Coleridge’s examination of Wordsworth’s views        205

        His critical qualifications                          206

        Unusual integrity of his critique                    207

        Analysis of it                                       207

        The “suspension of disbelief”                        208

        Attitude to metre                                    208

        Excursus on Shakespeare’s _Poems_                    210

        Challenges Wordsworth on “real” and “rustic” life    210

        “Prose” diction and metre again                      211

        Condemnation in form of Wordsworth’s theory          212

        The _Argumentum ad Gulielmum_                        212

        The study of his poetry                              213

        High merits of the examination                       213

        Wordsworth a rebel to Longinus and Dante             214

        The _Preface_ compared more specially with the _De
          Vulgari_                                           215

        And Dante’s practice                                 215

        With Wordsworth’s                                    216

        The comparison fatal to Wordsworth as a critic       217

        Other critical places in Coleridge                   218

        The rest of the _Biographia_                         218

        _The Friend_                                         219

        _Aids to Reflection_, &c.                            220

        The _Lectures on Shakespeare_, &c.                   220

        Their chaotic character                              221

        And preciousness                                     222

        Some noteworthy things in them: general              223

        And particular                                       224

        Coleridge on other dramatists                        224

        The _Table Talk_                                     224

        The _Miscellanies_                                   225

        The Lecture _On Style_                               226

        The _Anima Poetæ_                                    227

        The _Letters_                                        229

        The Coleridgean position and quality                 230

        He introduces once for all the criterion of
          Imagination, realising and disrealising            231

        The “Companions”                                     232

        Southey                                              233

        General characteristics of his Criticism             234

        Reviews                                              235

        _The Doctor_                                         235

        Altogether somewhat _impar sibi_                     236

        Lamb                                                 237

        His “occultism”                                      238

        And alleged inconstancy                              238

        The early _Letters_                                  239

        The _Specimens_                                      240

        The Garrick Play Notes                               241

        Miscellaneous Essays                                 242

        _Elia_                                               242

        The later _Letters_                                  243

        Uniqueness of Lamb’s critical style                  244

        And thought                                          245

        Leigh Hunt: his somewhat inferior position           246

        Reasons for it                                       246

        His attitude to Dante                                247

        Examples from _Imagination and Fancy_                248

        Hazlitt                                              251

        Method of dealing with him                           251

        His surface and occasional faults: Imperfect
          knowledge and method                               252

        Extra-literary prejudice                             253

        His radical and usual excellence                     254

        _The English Poets_                                  255

        The _Comic Writers_                                  256

        _The Age of Elizabeth_                               257

        _Characters of Shakespeare_                          258

        _The Plain Speaker_                                  259

        _The Round Table_, &c.                               261

        _The Spirit of the Age_                              262

        _Sketches and Essays_                                263

        _Winterslow_                                         263

        Hazlitt’s critical virtue                            263

        In set pieces                                        264

        And universally                                      265

        Blake                                                266

        His critical position and dicta                      267

        The “Notes on Reynolds”                              268

        And Wordsworth                                       268

        Commanding position of these                         268

        Sir Walter Scott commonly undervalued as a critic    270

        Injustice of this                                    271

        Campbell: his _Lectures on Poetry_                   272

        His _Specimens_                                      272

        Shelley: his _Defence of Poetry_                     274

        Landor                                               276

        His lack of judicial quality                         276

        In regular Criticism                                 276

        The _Conversations_                                  277

        _Loculus Aureolus_                                   278

        But again disappointing                              278

        The revival of the Pope quarrels                     279

        Bowles                                               279

        Byron                                                281

        The _Letter to Murray_, &c.                          281

        Others: Isaac Disraeli                               282

        Sir Egerton Brydges                                  283

        _The Retrospective Review_                           283

        The _Baviad_ and _Anti-Jacobin_                      286

        With Wolcot and Mathias                              287

        The influence of the new _Reviews_, &c.              288

        Jeffrey                                              289

        His loss of place and its cause                      289

        His inconsistency                                    290

        His criticism on Madame de Staël                     291

        Its lesson                                           293

        Hallam                                               293

        His achievement                                      294

        Its merits                                           294

        And defects                                          295

        In general distribution and treatment                295

        In some particular instances                         296

        His central weakness                                 297

        And the value left by it                             298

                              CHAPTER II.

                         MIL-HUIT-CENT-TRENTE.

        The _Globe_                                          299
        Charles de Rémusat, Vitet, J. J. Ampère              300
        Sainte-Beuve: his topography                         301
        The earlier articles                                 302
        _Portraits Littéraires_ and _Portraits de Femmes_    304
        The _Portraits Contemporains_                        306
        He “arrives”                                         309
        _Port-Royal_                                         310
        Its literary episodes                                311
        On Racine                                            312
        _Chateaubriand et son Groupe Littéraire_             313
        Faults found with it                                 314
        Its extraordinary merits                             315
        And final _dicta_                                    316
        The _Causeries_ at last                              317
        Their length, &c.                                    318
        Bricks of the house                                  319
        His occasional polemic                               322
        The _Nouveaux Lundis_                                324
        The conclusion of this matter                        326

        Michelet and Quinet                                  329
        Hugo                                                 330
        _William Shakespeare_                                331
        _Littérature et Philosophie_                         331
        The _Cromwell_ Preface                               332
        And that to the _Orientales_                         333
        Capital position of this latter                      334
        The “_work_”                                         335
        Nisard: his _Ægri Somnia_                            335
        His _Essais sur le Romantisme_                       336
        Their _culpa maxima_                                 338
        Gautier                                              339
        His theory—“Art for Art’s sake,” &c.                 340
        His practice—_Les Grotesques_                        341
        _Histoire du Romantisme_, &c.                        341
        Ubiquity of felicity in his criticism                342
        Saint-Marc Girardin                                  343
        Planche                                              344
        Weight of his criticism                              344
        Magnin                                               347
        Mérimée                                              348

                              CHAPTER III.

                     GOETHE AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES.

        Hamann                                               352

        Lichtenberg                                          354

        Herder                                               355

        His drawbacks of tediousness                         355

        Pedagogy                                             355

        And _meteorosophia_                                  356

        But great merits                                     356

        The _Fragmente_                                      356

        The _Kritische Walder_                               357

        The _Ursachen des Gesunknen Geschmacks_              357

        The _Ideen_, &c.                                     358

        Age-, Country-, and Race-, Criticism                 358

        Specimens and Remarks                                359

        Wieland                                              360

        Goethe                                               361

        The _Hamlet_ criticism, &c.                          361

        The _Sprüche in Prosa_                               362

        The Sterne passages                                  363

        Reviews and Notices                                  365

        The _Conversations_                                  366

        Some more general things: Goethe on Scott and
          Byron                                              372

        On the historic and comparative estimate of
          literature                                         372

        Summing up: the merits of Goethe’s criticism         373

        Its drawbacks: too much of his age                   374

        Too much a utilitarian of Culture                    375

        Unduly neglectful of literature as literature        376

        Schiller                                             377

        His Æsthetic Discourses                              378

        The Bürger review                                    378

        The _Xenien_                                         380

        The Correspondence with Goethe                       381

        The _Naïve and Sentimental Poetry_                   383

        Others: Bürger                                       384

        Richter                                              385

        The _Vorschule der Æsthetik_                         385

        The so-called “Romantic School”                      386

        Novalis                                              387

        The _Heinrich_                                       387

        The earlier _Fragments_                              388

        The later                                            389

        His critical magic                                   390

        Tieck                                                390

        The Schlegels                                        391

        Their general position and drift                     392

        The _Characteristiken_                               393

        A. W.: the _Kritische Schriften_ of 1828             394

        On Voss                                              394

        On Bürger                                            395

        The _Urtheile_, &c.                                  396

        The _Vorlesungen über Dramatische Kunst und
          Literatur_                                         396

        Their initial and other merit                        397

        The Schlegelian position                             398

        The _Vorlesungen über Schöne Literatur und Kunst_    399

        Illustrated still more by Friedrich                  401

        Uhland                                               402

        Schubarth                                            403

        Solger                                               404

        Periodicals, Histories, &c.                          404

                              CHAPTER IV.

        THE CHANGE IN THE OTHER NATIONS                      406

        INTERCHAPTER VIII.
        (WITH AN EXCURSUS ON PERIODICAL CRITICISM.)          408

                                BOOK IX.

                     THE LATER NINETEENTH CENTURY.

                               CHAPTER I.

                    THE SUCCESSORS OF SAINTE-BEUVE.

        _Ordonnance_ of this chapter                         431

        Philarète Chasles                                    432

        Barbey d’Aurévilly                                   433

        On Hugo                                              434

        On others                                            435

        Strong redeeming points in him                       436

        Doudan                                               436

        Interest of his general attitude                     437

        And particular utterances                            437

        Renan                                                439

        Taine                                                440

        His _culpa_                                          440

        His miscellaneous critical work                      441

        His _Histoire de la Littérature Anglaise_            442

        Its shortcomings                                     443

        Instances of them                                    443

        Moutégut: his peculiarities                          444

        Delicacy and range of his work                       446

        Scherer: peculiar _moral_ character of his
          criticism                                          447

        Its consequent limitations                           448

        The solid merits accompanying them                   448

        Sainte-Beuve + Gautier                               450
        Banville                                             450
        Saint-Victor                                         451
        Baudelaire                                           452
        Crépet’s _Les Poètes Français_                       453
        Flaubert: the “Single Word”                          454
        “Naturalism”                                         454
        Zola                                                 455
        _Le Roman Experimental_                              456
        Examples of his criticism                            456
        The reasons of his critical incompetency             458
        “Les Deux Goncourt”                                  458
        “Scientific criticism”: Hennequin                    459
        “Comparative Literature”: Texte                      462
        Academic Criticism: Gaston Paris                     464
        Caro, Taillandier, &c.                               465
        The “Light Horsemen”: Janin                          466
        Pontmartin                                           467
        Veuillot                                             468
        Not so black as, &c.                                 469
        The present                                          469

                              CHAPTER II.

                     BETWEEN COLERIDGE AND ARNOLD.

       The English Critics of 1830-60                        472

       Wilson                                                472

       Strange medley of his criticism                       473

       The _Homer_ and the other larger critical             473
         collections

       The _Spenser_                                         474

       The _Specimens of British Critics_                    475

       _Dies Boreales_                                       476

       Faults in all                                         476

       And in the republished work                           477

       De Quincey: his anomalies                             478

       And perversities as a critic                          479

       In regard to all literatures                          480

       Their causes                                          480

       The _Rhetoric_ and the _Style_                        481

       His compensations                                     482

       Lockhart                                              483

       Difficulty of appraising his criticism                483

       The _Tennyson_ review                                 483

       On Coleridge, Burns, Scott, and Hook                  484

       His general critical character                        485

       Hartley Coleridge                                     485

       Forlorn condition of his criticism                    485

       Its quality                                           486

       Defects                                               486

       And examples                                          487

       Maginn                                                487

       His parody-criticisms                                 488

       And more serious efforts                              488

        Macaulay                                             490
        His exceptional competence in some ways              490
        The early articles                                   490
        His drawbacks                                        490
        The practical choking of the good seed               491
        His literary surveys in the _Letters_                492
        His confession                                       493
        The _Essays_                                         493
        Similar dwindling in Carlyle                         495
        The earlier _Essays_                                 497
        The later                                            497
        The attitude of the _Latter-day Pamphlets_           498
        The conclusion of this matter                        499
        Thackeray                                            500
        His one critical weakness                            500
        And excellence                                       501
        _Blackwood_ in 1849 on Tennyson                      502
        George Brimley                                       504
        His Essay on Tennyson                                505
        His other work                                       507
        His intrinsic and chronological importance           508
        “Gyas and Cloanthus”                                 508
        Milman, Croker, Hayward                              509
        Sydney Smith, Senior, Helps                          509
        Elwin, Lancaster, Hannay                             510
        Dallas                                               511
        The _Poetics_                                        511
        _The Gay Science_                                    512
        Others: J. S. Mill                                   514

                              CHAPTER III.

                      ENGLISH CRITICISM—1860-1900.

        Matthew Arnold: one of the greater critics           515

        His position defined early                           516

        The _Preface_ of 1853                                517

        Analysis of it                                       517

        And interim summary of its gist                      520

        Contrast with Dryden                                 520

        Chair-work at Oxford, and contributions to
          periodicals                                        521

        _On Translating Homer_                               522

        The “grand style”                                    522

        Discussion of it                                     523

        The Study of Celtic Literature                       526

        Its assumptions                                      527

        The _Essays_: their case for Criticism               527

        Their examples thereof                               529

        The latest work                                      530

        The Introduction to Ward’s _English Poets_           531

        “Criticism of Life”                                  531

        Poetic Subject or Poetic Moment                      532

        Arnold’s accomplishment and position as a critic     534

        The Carlylians                                       537

        Kingsley                                             538

        Froude                                               539

        Mr Buskin                                            539

        G. H. Lewes                                          540

        His _Principles of Success in Literature_            540

        His _Inner Life of Art_                              542

        Bagehot                                              542

        R. H. Hutton                                         543

        His evasions of literary criticism                   544

        Pater                                                544

        His frank Hedonism                                   545

        His _polytechny_ and his style                       545

        His formulation of the new critical attitude         546

        _The Renaissance_                                    546

        Objections to its process                            547

        Importance of _Marius the Epicurean_                 547

        _Appreciations_ and the “_Guardian_” Essays          548

        Universality of his method                           551

        Mr J. A. Symonds                                     551

        Thomson (“B. V.”)                                    552

        William Minto                                        553

        His books on English Prose and Poetry                554

        H. D. Traill                                         554

        His critical strength                                555

        On Sterne and Coleridge                              555

        _Essays on Fiction_                                  556

        “The Future of Humour”                               556

        Others: Mansel, Venables, Stephen, Lord Houghton,
          Pattison, Church, &c.                              557

        Patmore                                              558

        Mr Edmund Gurney                                     559

        _The Power of Sound_                                 559

        _Tertium Quid_                                       560

                              CHAPTER IV.

                        LATER GERMAN CRITICISM.

        Heine: deceptiveness of his criticism                563

        In the _Romantische Schule_, and elsewhere           563

        The qualities and delights of it                     564

        Schopenhauer                                         566

        Vividness and originality of his critical
          observation                                        567

        _Die Welt als Wille_, &c.                            568

        Grillparzer                                          569

        His motto in criticism                               569

        His results in aphorism                              570

        And in individual judgment                           571

        A critic of limitations: but a critic                571

        Carrière: his _Æsthetik_                             573

        Later German Shakespeare-critics                     575

        Gervinus: his _German Poetry_                        575

        On Bürger                                            576

        The Shakespeare-heretics: Rümelin                    577

        Freytag                                              578

        Hillebrand and cosmopolitan criticism                579

        Nietzsche                                            581

        _Zarathustra_, the _Birth of Tragedy_, and _Der
          Fall Wagner_                                       582

        _Unzeitgemässe Betrachtungen_                        582

        _La Gaya Scienza_                                    583

        _Jenseits von Gut und Böse_, &c.                     584

        _Götzen-Dämmerung_                                   585

        His general critical position                        586

                               CHAPTER V.

                      REVIVALS AND COMMENCEMENTS.

        Limitations of this chapter                          587
        Spain                                                588
        Italy                                                588
        De Sanctis                                           589
        Character of his work                                590
        Switzerland                                          591
        Vinet                                                592
        Sainte-Beuve on him                                  592

        His criticism of Chateaubriand and Hugo              593
        His general quality                                  593
        Amiel: great interest of his critical impressions    594
        Examples thereof                                     595
        The pity of it                                       597

                              CONCLUSION.

 § I. THE PRESENT STATE OF CRITICISM                                 603

 § II. THE CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE MATTER                            610

                              APPENDIX I.

                      THE OXFORD CHAIR OF POETRY.


        The holders                                          615
        Eighteenth-century minors                            616
        Lowth                                                617
        Hurdis                                               617
        The rally: Copleston                                 618
        Conybeare                                            620
        Milman                                               620
        Keble                                                621

        The _Occasional_ [English] Papers                    622
        The _Prælections_                                    622
        Garbett                                              625
        Claughton                                            626
        Doyle                                                626
        Shairp                                               627
        Palgrave                                             628
        _Salutantur vivi_                                    629

                              APPENDIX II.

                          AMERICAN CRITICISM.

        An attempt in outline only                           630
        Its difficulties                                     631
        The early stages                                     631
        The origins and pioneers                             632
        Ticknor                                              632
        Longfellow                                           633
        Emerson                                              633
        Poe                                                  634
        Lowell: his general position                         636
        _Among my Books_                                     637
        _My Study Windows_                                   637

        _Essays on the English Poets_                        638

        Last Essays                                          639

        O. W. Holmes                                         639

        The whole duty of critics stated by him _in alia
          materia_                                           639

        Whitman and the “Democratic” ideal                   640

        Margaret Fuller                                      641

        Ripley                                               642

        Whipple                                              642

        Lanier                                               643

   INDEX                                                          647




                                BOOK VII

                   THE DISSOLVENTS OF NEO-CLASSICISM


                             --------------


“_May there not be something in the Gothic Romance peculiarly suited to
the views of a genius and to the ends of poetry? And may not the
philosophic moderns have gone too far in their perpetual ridicule and
contempt of it?_”—HURD.

“_Quelquefois un besoin de philosopher gâte tout._”—JOUBERT.




                               CHAPTER I.

                    INTRODUCTORY AND RETROSPECTIVE.

SCOPE OF THE VOLUME—THE TERM MODERN—THE ORIGINS—NEED OF CAUTION HERE—
    CASE OF BUTLER ON RYMER, DENHAM—AND BENLOWES—OF ADDISON AND OTHERS—
    OF LA BRUYÈRE AND “TOUT EST DIT”—OF FÉNELON AND GRAVINA—OF DRYDEN
    AND FONTENELLE—THE MORE EXCELLENT WAY.


[Sidenote: _Scope of the volume._]

The present volume takes the work of no more than one century, the
nineteenth, as a whole; but, according to our plan, casts back to the
eighteenth, and even earlier, in order to deal with those dissidents or
pioneers who then laid the foundation of the chief critical performances
of the nineteenth itself.

[Sidenote: _The term Modern._]

For this work—foundation and superstructure—there is no more convenient
and suitable appellation than “Modern,” used neither in the
complimentary and rather question-begging sense which has recently been
attached to it,[2] nor in the more slighting one of Shakespeare, but
with a merely accurate and chronological connotation. Some would call
this criticism “Romantic”; but that term, in addition to a certain
vagueness, has the drawbacks both of question-begging and of
provocation. There is no other that has the slightest claim to enter
into competition, though we may have in passing to refer to such
pretenders as “Æsthetic,” “Dogmatic,” “Scientific,” and what not.

The term “Modern” has, moreover,—so long as it is dissociated from any
such futile belittling of “Ancient” as was implied in its use during the
Quarrel,—the great advantage of keeping a secondary, but very convenient
and in no way objectionable, opposition to “Ancient” itself. We have
seen that, with much intelligent and judicious, there was more
unintelligent and corrupt, following of the ancients during the period
which we surveyed in the last volume: and that there was a still more
dangerous and hurtful tendency to disfranchise modern literature as an
equal source with ancient for the discovery of critical truths. Now, if
there is a point wholly to be counted for righteousness, to at least the
better part of the criticism which has prevailed for the last hundred
years, and was a militant force for at least fifty years earlier, it is
this taking into consideration of “Modern” literature, not to the
exclusion of “Ancient,” but on even terms with it. It is no doubt much
easier to say _nullo discrimine habebo_[3] than to carry it out,
especially as a man grows older. But it is the cardinal principle of
“Modern” criticism that the most modern of works is to be judged, not by
adjustment to anything else, but on its own merits—that the critic must
always behave as if the book he takes from its wrapper might be a new
_Hamlet_ or a new _Waverley_,—or something as good as either, but more
absolutely novel in kind than even _Waverley_,—however shrewdly he may
suspect that it is very unlikely to be any such thing.

[Sidenote: _The origins._]

The actual investigation of the last volume brought us down to (and in
La Harpe’s case a little beyond) the close of the eighteenth century
itself, and showed us the final stages of the Neo-Classic dynasty, which
still, in all European countries except Germany, reigned, and even
appeared to govern; but which, not merely in Germany but to some extent
also in England, was on the point of having the sceptre wrenched out of
its hands. We had traced this critical system from its construction or
reconstruction by the Italians of the sixteenth century onwards; we saw
its merits and its defects. And we saw likewise that, in the usual
general, gradual, incalculable way, opposition to it, conscious or
unconscious, began to grow up at different times and in different
places. This opposition was a plant of early but slow and fitful growth
in England, rather later but more vigorous and rapid in Germany; while
in the Southern countries it hardly grew at all, and in France was
cruelly attacked and kept down, if not exactly extirpated, by the
weeding-hook of authority.

[Sidenote: _Need of caution here._]

But it does not follow that we can put the finger on this and that
person as having “begun” the new movement. Such an opinion is always
tempting to not too judicious inquirers, and there has been no lack of
books on _Le Romantisme des Classiques_ and the like. The fact, of
course, simply is that everything human exists essentially or
potentially in the men of every time; and that you may not only find
books in the running brooks but (what appears at first more
contradictory) dry stones in them: while, on the other hand, founts of
water habitually gush from the midst of the driest rock. Indagation of
the kind is always treacherous, and has to be conducted with a great
deal of circumspection.

[Sidenote: _Case of Butler on Rymer, Denham,_]

It would be difficult to find an author who illustrates this danger and
treachery better than Butler, whom some may have been surprised not to
find in the last volume. The author of _Hudibras_ was born not long
after Milton, and nearly twenty years before Dryden, who outlived him by
the same space. His great poem did not give much room for critical
utterances in literature; but the _Genuine Remains_[4] are full of it in
separate places, both verse and prose. Take these singly, and you may
make Butler out to be, not merely a critic, but half a dozen critics. In
perhaps the best known of his minor pieces, the _Repartees between Cat
and Puss_, he satirises “Heroic” Plays, and is therefore clearly for
“the last age,” as also in the savage and admirable “On Critics who
Judge Modern Plays precisely by the Rules of the Ancients,” which has
been reasonably, or certainly, thought to be directed against Rymer’s
blasphemy of Beaumont and Fletcher, published two years before Butler’s
death. The satirist’s references and illustrations (as in that to “the
laws of good King Howel’s days”) are sometimes too Caroline to be
quotable; but the force and sweep of his protest is simply glorious. The
_Panegyric on Sir John Denham_ is chiefly personal; but if Butler had
been convinced that _Cooper’s Hill_ was the _ne plus ultra_ of English
poetry he could hardly have written it: and though the main victim of
“To a Bad Poet” has not been identified,[5] the lines—

               “For so the rhyme be at the verse’s end,
               No matter whither all the rest does tend”—

could scarcely have been written except against the new poetry. The
“Pindaric Ode on Modern Critics” is chiefly directed against the general
critical vice of snarling, and the passages on critics and poets in the
_Miscellaneous Thoughts_ follow suit. But if we had only the verse
_Remains_ we should be to some extent justified in taking Butler, if not
for a precursor of the new Romanticism, at any rate for a rather
strenuous defender of the old.

[Sidenote: _and Benlowes._]

But turn to the _Characters_. Most of these that deal with literature
are in the general vein which the average seventeenth-century
character-writer took from Theophrastus, though few put so much salt of
personal wit into this as Butler. In “A Small Poet” the earlier pages
might be aimed at almost anybody from Dryden himself (whom Butler, it is
said, did not love) down to Flecknoe. But there is only one name
mentioned in the piece; and that name, which is made the object of a
furious and direct attack, lightened by some of the brightest flashes of
Butler’s audacious and acrid humour, is the name of Edward Benlowes.[6]
Now, that Benlowes is a person _taillable et corvéable à merci et à
miséricorde_ by any critical oppressor, nobody who has read him can
deny. He is as extravagant as Crashaw without so much poetry, and as
Cleveland without so much cleverness. But he is a poet, and a
“metaphysical” poet (as Butler was himself in another way), and an
example, though a rather awful example, of that “poetic fury” which
makes Elizabethan poetry. Yet Butler is more savage with him than with
Denham.

The fact is that Butler’s criticism is merely the occasional
determination of a man of active genius and satiric temper to matters
literary. Absurdities strike him from whatever school they come; and he
lashes them unmercifully whensoever and whencesoever they present
themselves. But he has no general creed: he speaks merely to his brief
as public prosecutor of the ridiculous, and also as a staunch John Bull.
If he had been writing at the time when his _Remains_ were first
actually published, it is exceedingly probable that he would have
“horsed” Gray as pitilessly as he horses Benlowes; if he had been
writing sixty years later still, that he would have been as “savage and
Tartarly” to Keats and Shelley, or seventy years later, to Tennyson, as
the _Quarterly_ itself. This is not criticism: and we must look later
and more carefully before we discern any real revolution in literary
taste.

[Sidenote: _Of Addison and others._]

It is even very unsafe to attempt to discover much definite and
intentional precursorship in Addison, who was born sixty years after
Butler. There is no need to repeat what has been said of what seems to
me misconception as to his use of the word Imagination: nor is this the
point which is principally aimed at here. But the more we examine
Addison’s critical utterances, whether we agree with Hurd or not that
they are “shallow,” we shall, I think, be forced to conclude that any
depth they may have has nothing to do with Romanticism. Addison likes
Milton, no doubt, because he is a sensible man and a good critic, as a
general reason. But when we come to investigate special ones we shall
find that he likes him rather because he himself is a Whig, a pupil of
Dryden, and a religious man—nay, perhaps even because he really does
think that Milton carries out the classical idea of Epic—than because of
Milton’s mystery, his “romantic vague,” his splendour of diction and
verse and imagery. So, too, the admiration of _Chevy Chase_ is partly a
whim or a joke, partly determined by the fact that at that time the
Whigs were the “Jingoes,” and that _Chevy Chase_ is very pugnacious and
very patriotic. Nowhere, from the articles on True and False Wit to the
Imagination papers, do we find any real sense of unrest or
dissatisfaction with the accepted theory of poetry. There is actually
more in Prior, with all his profanation of the _Nut-browne Maid_ and his
distortions of the Spenserian stanza.

[Sidenote: _Of La Bruyère and_ “Tout est dit.”]

So if we look backward a little, and a little southward, we shall,
despite the praise which we were able to accord to some critical dicta
of La Bruyère, find very little reason to regard that admirable master
of Addison himself as a “Romantic before Romanticism.” He is a sensible
man with a fairly catholic taste: but that is all. Nay, his principle of
_Tout est dit_, though not quite irresistibly in practice, almost
certainly leads to the conclusion that the oldest writers are likely to
be the best, and to the habit of extending to new writers, or to the
mass of precedent writing, a rather lukewarm welcome and a distinctly
prejudiced criticism. In a certain sense, no doubt, all _has_ been said
long ago—in gist, in matter, in subject. But then in literature, and
especially in poetry, there is so much which is beside the gist, that is
superadded to the matter, that does _not_ depend upon the subject! The
thoughts suggested by birth and death, by dawn and sunset, by a blush
and a smile, by the red wine when it moveth itself aright in the glass,
and the green sea stretching from the white cliff-foot, and the “huge
and thoughtful night,” will always be at bottom and in essence the same.
But he must be a blind person who does not see that at any moment any
poet who _can_ may give them an entirely new form and cast and
presentation. In this sense—and it is the sense of the best “modern”
criticism—“tout est _à dire_.”

[Sidenote: _Of Fénelon and Gravina._]

We may seem to have got into an _impasse_: nor will such excellent
persons as Fénelon, and to go to yet another country, Gravina,[7] help
us out of it. Fénelon indeed had, as we saw, some striking
resipiscences, some individual pronouncements which, if they were as
unaccompanied by others as they are disconnected from them, would be
very promising indeed. But this very company that they do _not_ keep
disestates them unluckily: and you cannot doubt, as you read
_Télémaque_, that if the world had had to depend upon its author for
leadership in the migration from the critical House of Bondage, it would
never have got over the Red Sea, if it had even started on the journey.
Gravina, to that general perspicacity and equity which distinguishes all
these doubtful cases, added an unusually early and thorough appreciation
of _Greek_, and the advantage, peculiar to an Italian, of having an
actual classical period of modern literature extending over four entire
centuries: of all which he made good use. But it is at least very
difficult to discover, either in his original work or in the general
trend of his critical utterances, any dissatisfaction with the
prevailing direction of criticism in his time, or any determination to
take a wider outlook.

[Sidenote: _Of Dryden and Fontenelle._]

Indeed, putting aside Dryden (whose method led straight to the Promised
Land, and whose utterances show that he occasionally saw it afar off) as
one who came too early to feel any very conscious desire of setting out
on the pilgrimage of discovery, Fontenelle is perhaps the very earliest
critic of distinction who shows a decided restlessness. And he, as we
have sufficiently set forth, has too much of the critical Puck about him
to be a safe guide for the wayfaring man. In fact, “Lord! what fools
these mortals be!” is an exclamation which is always hovering on the
door of his lips, and sometimes all but escapes it.

[Sidenote: _The more excellent way._]

But this history must have been told to very little purpose if readers
still expect sharp and decided turns, assignable to definite hours and
particular men, in the evolutions of criticism. Rather has it been one
of our special lessons—it would be uncritical to say our special
objects—to prove that these things are not to be expected. It is a part
of the Neo-Classic error itself to assume some definite goal of critical
perfection towards which all things tend, and which, when you have
attained it, permits you to take no further trouble except of imitation
and repetition. Just as you never know what new literary form the human
genius may take, and can therefore never lay down any absolute and final
schedule of literary kinds, and of literary perfection within these
kinds, so you can never shape the set of the prevalent taste, and you
can never do much more than give the boat the full benefit of the
current by dexterous rowing and steering. Indeed, as we have seen, the
taste in criticism and the taste in creation unite, or diverge, or set
dead against each other in a manner quite incalculable, and only
interpretable as making somehow for the greater glory of Literature.
Somewhere about the time to which we have harked back—the meeting of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, or a little later, or much later,
as the genius of different countries and persons would have it—a veering
of the wind, an eddy of the current, _did_ take place. And it is of this
that we have to give account in the present Book—of the consequences of
it that we have to give an account in the present volume.




                              CHAPTER II.

                     THE RALLY OF GERMANY—LESSING.

STARTING-POINT OF THIS VOLUME—NEO-CLASSIC COMPLACENCY AND EXCLUSIVENESS
    ILLUSTRATED FROM CALLIÈRES—BÉAT DE MURALT—HIS ATTENTION TO ENGLISH—
    AND TO FRENCH—GERMAN CRITICISM PROPER—A GLANCE BACKWARD—THEOBALD
    HOECK—WECKHERLIN AND OTHERS—WEISE, WERNICKE, WERENFELS, ETC.—SOME
    MUTINEERS: GRYPHIUS AND NEUMEISTER—GOTTSCHED ONCE MORE—BODMER AND
    BREITINGER—THE ‘DISKURSE DER MALER’—GRADUAL DIVERGENCE FROM THEIR
    STANDPOINT; KÖNIG ON “TASTE”—MAIN WORKS OF THE SWISS SCHOOL—
    BREITINGER’S ‘KRITISCHE DICHTKUNST,’ ETC.—BODMER’S ‘VON DEM
    WUNDERBAREN,’ ETC.—SPECIAL CRITICISMS OF BOTH—BODMER’S VERSE
    CRITICISM—THEIR LATER WORK IN MEDIÆVAL POETRY, AND THEIR GENERAL
    POSITION—THE “SWISS-SAXON” QUARREL—THE ELDER SCHLEGELS: JOHANN
    ADOLF—JOHANN ELIAS—MOSES MENDELSSOHN—LESSING—SOME CAUTIONS
    RESPECTING HIM—HIS MORAL OBSESSION; ON ‘SOLIMAN THE SECOND’—THE
    STRICTURES ON ARIOSTO’S PORTRAIT OF ALCINA—‘HAMLET’ AND ‘SEMIRAMIS’—
    THE ‘COMTE D’ESSEX,’ ‘RODOGUNE,’ ‘MÉROPE’—LESSING’S GALLOPHOBIA—AND
    TYPOMANIA—HIS STUDY OF ANTIQUITY MORE THAN COMPENSATING—AND
    ESPECIALLY OF ARISTOTLE—WITH WHOM HE COMBINES DIDEROT—HIS
    DEFICIENCIES IN REGARD TO MEDIÆVAL LITERATURE—THE CLOSE OF THE
    ‘DRAMATURGIE’ AND ITS MORAL—MISCELLANEOUS SPECIMENS OF HIS
    CRITICISM—HIS ATTITUDE TO ÆSCHYLUS AND ARISTOPHANES—FREDERIC THE
    GREAT—‘DE LA LITTÉRATURE ALLEMANDE’.


[Sidenote: _Starting point of this volume._]

It should not be necessary to make much further observation of the
linking kind between this volume and the last; but a few more words may
be desirable on the fact that from a very early period of the eighteenth
century itself there were perceptible underground mutterings of revolt;
and that, steadily or fitfully, another current of criticism, fed
likewise by springs underground, [Sidenote: _Neo-Classic complacency and
exclusiveness illustrated from Callières._] made its appearance side by
side with, but running counter to, the orthodox, yet almost entirely
neglected by orthodoxy. Orthodoxy indeed, in its special home, would
have specially emphasised the scornful question, “Can any good thing
come out of _Germany_?” The _locus_ of Bouhours is hackneyed, and has
been quoted already (ii. 315). But nothing can better show the state of
complacent fatuity to which Neo-Classicism, _plus_ national conceit, had
reduced the French at the close of the seventeenth century, than the
“Laws of Apollo,” which, in the twelfth book of the treatise which has
the honour to have given suggestions to Swift, Callières[8] represents
the god as promulgating to appease the strife of Ancients and Moderns.
_Les trois nations polies_ are the French, the Italians, and the
Spaniards: all others are more or less barbarians. These barbarians
(including not only the Germans, but the nation which had to its credit
Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton, and Dryden, with others who, if
lesser than these, were the equals of the two or three best of France)
may be allowed to write Latin as a concession to the literary
incompetence of their own tongues; but the polished nations should not
do so. Homer is the greatest of all poets, and Virgil the second; the
third place had better remain vacant. No witchcraft or romance of
chivalry is to be admitted into poetry. Acrostics and anagrams are to be
banished from it. _Et patati et patata._ Apollo himself could at the
time hardly have got into the head of Callières, not merely academician
but diplomatist as he was, what an utterly ridiculous figure he would
cut to all but the most philosophical and tolerant of posterity. Yet be
it remembered that Gottsched held no different creed nearly fifty years
after in Germany itself, and La Harpe no very different one more than a
hundred years after in France; while among ourselves, and halfway
between these two, even such iconoclasts in other ways as Adam Smith and
David Hume would have made very little difficulty about accepting it.
The overthrow of a belief of such prevalence, such toughness, such
duration, cannot have been achieved but by agencies widespreading,
patient, various: and it is these agencies that we must now investigate.

[Sidenote: _The_ Béat de Muralt.]

Not very many years later than the _Histoire Poétique_ there was
written, in French also, but not by a Frenchman, a document curiously
different in tenor, though by no means ostensibly, or indeed to any
great extent really, breaking with Neo-Classicism. The Swiss—as their
peculiar position, not merely politically in the midst of Europe, but
racially as overlapping and overlapped by France, Germany, and Italy,
made almost necessary—had begun early to take a sort of bystander-view
of European Literature. The excellent essay of Herr Hamelius[9] was
perhaps the first recent document to attract much attention to the
_Lettres sur les Anglois et sur les Francois_ of Béat Louis de Muralt.
Muralt was a French-writing but a German-speaking Swiss; he says (rather
to his disadvantage as a critic, but usefully on this head) that
“H_ou_mour” is “ce que _nous_ appellons _Einfall_,” and what the French
mean by “dire de bons mots,” from which we can at least see that the
excellent M. de Muralt had not the faintest notion of what Humour
specifically is. He travelled in England during the last decade of the
seventeenth century; but his _Letters_ upon us and the French were not
published till 1727, in 12mo, with no imprint of place. They acquired,
after the fashion of the time, a sort of “snow-ball” increment of
comment by apologists (a “Lord,” of course, for England), and are
chiefly valuable as symptoms. [Sidenote: _His attention to English,_]
Muralt is, as we should expect, much more occupied with manners than
with letters; and in fact, as regards English, deals in detail with
hardly any literary kind save comedy. Here (as the _orbis terrarum_
often remarks of our _alter orbis_) he thinks that we have too good an
opinion of ourselves: “Sur toutes sortes de sujets il faut qu’ils se
préfèrent au reste du monde.” He thinks Corneille and Molière (whom he
would specially avenge) ill-treated by the English dramatists who borrow
from them. He accuses Dryden—not by name, but transparently and truly as
“the most famous of their poets”—of stealing from Corneille and abusing
him; neither of which articles is just. On the other hand, he is
certainly too complimentary (though Saint-Evremond[10] was responsible
for the exaggeration) in calling Shadwell “_one of_ the most famous” of
the same poets; and we may abandon _The Miser_ to his arrows. He admits
that our literature outside the theatre is “full of good sense and
originality,” but says little about it. He has himself the good sense to
object to Louis Quatorze dress, for Romans and Carthaginians, on both
stages.

[Sidenote: _and to French._]

He is much more copious on French Literature; and his judgments here are
more interesting, because he is at a more original angle. Much of his
outlook is purely Neo-Classic. He has a thorough belief in Kinds; he has
abundance to say “in the _aib_stract” about _bon sens_ and _bel esprit_;
and for one writing so late he is surprisingly copious on Voiture and
Sarrasin and Balzac. He thinks Rabelais quite “beneath humanity,”—having
indeed, here and elsewhere, a good deal of solid German morals about
him. The most surprising thing is his attitude to Boileau, whom he
pronounces to have plenty of sense and art, but no great genius. This
attitude, and the taking of English literature into serious literary
consideration for almost the first time on the Continent, since Lilius
Giraldus,[11] are the things which, from the literary side, deserve most
note in Muralt.[12] And the latter—not by any means merely from that
point of view of “preferring ourselves to others”—is the most important
of all. So long as general critical attention to modern literature was
confined to French, Italian, and Spanish, all intimately connected with
and indebted to each other, and all descended from Latin, no real
“fermentation” could take place. The English yeast set it going at once,
in Germany as elsewhere.

Muralt, however, was an exceptional and cosmopolitan sort of person, and
the note which he sounded was not immediately taken up, though it is
very noteworthy that when it was, it was again in Switzerland.

[Sidenote: _German Criticism proper._]

The account which we gave of German criticism proper before 1700, and of
that part of it which belongs to the Neo-Classic dispensation after that
date, was avowedly scanty: the reasons for this apparent stinginess
being twofold—the comparative paucity of the materials, and even more
the comparative unimportance of almost all those that do exist. But we
undertook in a manner to make good the seeming slight; and it is our
present business to do so.[13]

[Sidenote: _A glance backward._]

We saw that up to the eighteenth century, and indeed nearly up to the
end of its first quarter, German criticism had done very little, and
that it was never to do much in the direction of “correctness.”
Indirectly, however, in the later half of the seventeenth century, when
the _furia_ of the Thirty Years’ War had in a manner sunk to rest,
something was done in the way of preliminary fermentation both by the
late inoculation of Germany with the Euphuist-Marinist-Gongorist
measles, which is there identified chiefly with the names of Lohenstein
and Hoffmanswaldau, and by reaction against this,[14] while something
further has, at least by some, been considered to have been done by
Gottsched himself.

[Sidenote: _Theobald Hoeck._]

The works of this period are not, I believe, very common even in
Germany, but the unwearied intelligence with which the British Museum
has been managed for the last two generations has supplied English
readers with a very fair, though not yet quite satisfying, proportion of
the most important. The earliest of these authors—a predecessor of Opitz
even, who might, and perhaps should, have been mentioned in the last
volume—was Theobald Hoeck, or as he is called on the title-page of his
quaintly-named _Poems_,[15] Othoblad Oeckhe. Hoeck makes the nineteenth
chapter of his “Fair Field of Flowers” an ode of fourteen five-lined
stanzas, _Von Art der Deutschen Poeterey_, which perhaps ranks next to,
and certainly marks the new departure from, the vernacular Meister-song
_Arts_ referred to above.[16] But the style and the gist of the piece
are, I think, fairly enough shown in the following stanza—

           “Warumb sollen wir denn unser Teutsche Sprache[n]
           In gwisse Form und Gsatz nit auch mögen machen,
           Und Deutsches Carmen schreiben,
           Die Kunst zu treiben
           Bey Mann und Weiben?”

But it is hard for the poet when he has both metre and rhyme to look to—
when

             “Mann muss die _Pedes_ gleich so wol scandiren
             Den dactylum und auch Spondaeum rieren,”

and at the same time see that his rhymes are proper. The thing is
interesting as exhibiting modern German poetry in the go-cart with
laudable anxiety on the part of the infant to go rightly.

[Sidenote: _Weckherlin and others._]

The chief ferment, however, of German poetic and criticism of a kind did
not come till towards the middle of the century and when the Thirty
Years’ War was dying down (though it is thought to have been to some
extent determined by the sojourning of at least one German of
letters[17] in England quite in the earlier stage of that convulsion):
and it took final colour from French rather than from English, partly in
the form of Pléiade and Louis Treize _ampullæ_, partly in that of
“correctness” (as far as the Germans could reach it) _à la_ Boileau. The
earlier inquirers, such as Schottel, Zesen, Buchner, were painful and
estimable rhetoricians, anxious to get German into good scholastic ways.
Schottel, in his _Teutsche Sprachkunst_[18] and other works, is quite of
the old fashion in compounding rhetoric-poetic-composition books with
dictionary. Zesen’s _Hochdeutscher Helikon_[19] is an extremely fat
little book, the component parts of which are separately paged, and
sometimes not paged at all, and which discusses with the utmost care the
terms of the art in metre, rhyme, stanza-building, &c., gives rhyming
dictionaries first of masculine then of feminine rhymes, supplies
plenteous example-verse, and finishes with a _De Poetica_ of a more
general kind. Augustine Buchner[20] is still older-fashioned, and
reminds one of the sixteenth-century Italians in his little tractate on
the office and aim of poetry, its kinds, ornaments, &c.

[Sidenote: _Weise, Wernicke, Werenfels, &c._]

These are hardly at all critical; they are rhetorical-preceptist. But
the later men, such as Weise, Wernicke, and Werenfels, exhibit the
revolt against the school of conceit and bombast which in the later part
of the seventeenth century radiates from France all over Europe.
Christian Weise, _Professor Poeseos_ as he called himself, degrades
Poetry in his _Curiose Gedanken neben Deutschen Versen_ (1691) to the
position of a mere _ancilla_ of Rhetoric, and seems to have anticipated
Shaftesbury in making “ridicule the test of truth.” His namesake,
Wernicke, in the “Ad Lectorem” of his _Poetische Versuche_,[21] extols
Longinus, and makes “polite” remarks on Lohenstein and Hoffmanswaldau.
But _the_ German manifesto against the florid is the _Dissertatio de
Meteoris Orationis_ appended to the _De Logomachiis Eruditorum_ of
Samuel Werenfels, which appeared at Amsterdam within the eighteenth
century,[22] dedicated to no less a person than Gilbert Burnet, but
presents the matter of two theses composed fourteen and ten years
earlier. The _De Logomachiis_ itself has a certain interest for us, as
it hits among other things at frivolous and verbal criticism; but the
_Dissertatio_ is all ours. Werenfels, as usual basing himself upon
Longinus, without the slightest suspicion that he will be undone by his
reliance, distinguishes between ὕψηλα and μετέωρα—our old friends the
True and the False Sublime. He admits the importance of Imagination, but
will have it strictly ruled by Judgment, and makes another distinction
(not without acuteness) between good Figures and bad. He harks as far
back as Longolius and the Ciceronians for examples of literary
will-worship; but is evidently thinking throughout rather of
gorgeousness than of over-precision, and directs his attacks specially
at Claudian among the ancients, though he names Gongora among the
moderns. His final decision is that Italians, Spaniards, and Germans are
all painfully given to the meteoric; the French are _saniores_.[23]

[Sidenote: _Some mutineers: Gryphius and Neumeister._]

The germaner spirit of Germany, however,—to speak “meteorically” and in
character,—was by no means quenched by these _douches_ of correctness,
and continued to assert itself at intervals between the practice of the
Silesians and the theory of the Swiss. The most considerable German
dramatist of the seventeenth century, Andreas Gryphius, not merely
neglected the “classical” rules in his plays, but made light of them in
prefaces and lectures. Just before the end of the century, Erdmann
Neumeister (who was to live sixty years longer and overlap the time of
Goethe), enthusiastically recommending the fashionable opera, dismisses
the rules with a contemptuous inaccuracy[24] much more humiliating than
any polemic.

Without therefore wandering longer in these side-walks, we may say that
they form a real approach to the Romantic Revolt of the next century,
quite as much as—perhaps more than—they lead to the Gottschedian
preciseness. And this should sufficiently justify the notice of them
here.

[Sidenote: _Gottsched once more._]

The most important—perhaps one might say the only important—critical
document furnished by Gottsched himself to our general history is the
_Kritische Dichtung_, which has been already disposed of,[25] and this
is a document of the extremest Neo-Classicism. But he did not reach this
point at once: and the successive hardenings of heart by which he did
reach it are a curious topsy-turvy document in the other sense—a
document of the growth of Romanticism, and its effect in making its
enemies the more stubborn. These stages have been traced diligently and
clearly, if perhaps with a little unnecessary _animus_ and polemic, by
Herr Braitmaier.[26] When the appearance of the _Diskurse der Maler_
(_The_v. infra) induced Gottsched (who is allowed by friends and foes to
have had a very shrewd literary sense of the journalist’s or publisher’s
kind) to imitate them in the periodical entitled _Die Vernünftigen
Tadlerinnen_[27]—“The Intelligent Blamingwomen” or “Carperesses”—his
attitude was not at first very different from that of his then friends,
Bodmer and Breitinger, in appearance at least. But he proceeded to pay
attention (perhaps guided by them) to French criticism: and he
henceforward followed it, more and more to do evil in another
periodical, the _Biedermann_, in the successive editions of his
_Kritische Dichtkunst_, with increasing intensity in the important
_Beiträge zur Kritischen Historie der Deutschen Sprache, Poesie und
Beredsamkeit_, which he directed from 1732 to 1744, and lastly, in the
pamphlets and articles of the so-called Swiss-Saxon or Leipzig-Zürich
war.

As for the claims of Gottsched to be not a mere critical fossil, but a
real reformer and even a kind of precursor of the great German literary
school, in criticism as well as on creation, from Lessing to Goethe,
they were first put forward many years ago by Danzel, and after the
usual manner of literary whitewashings of the paradoxical kind, have
been accepted by some since. But they never could have commended
themselves to impartial and instructed students of literary history: and
they have been quite sufficiently disposed of by Herr Braitmaier. One
may fully take the view which was put forward towards the end of the
last volume about Gottsched’s critical worth, and yet have formed it
with full knowledge of the fact that he was an active and
well-intentioned worker in that enormous effort towards self-improvement
to which justice has there been done. But the notion that he was really
a fellow-worker with the Swiss school is, I must repeat, mistaken; and
the further notions of his having played the part of Dante, or at least
of Du Bellay, towards the purification and exaltation of German
language, and almost that of Dryden towards the refashioning of German
literature, are but fond things.[28]

[Sidenote: _Bodmer and Breitinger._]

The two Swiss professors, Bodmer and Breitinger, who have already
several times been named, form one of the most curious pairs of
brothers-in-arms whereof literary story makes mention. They were both
born in or near the same town, Zürich; the long lives of both (though
Breitinger’s was a little the shorter at both ends) nearly coincided;
both were christened John James; and they very early began, and long
continued, to qualify themselves for the position of heroes of a new
“Legend of Friendship” without even finding it necessary to begin with a
fight like Spenser’s Cambel and Triamond. Both pugnacious, they always
took the same side in their battles; they prefaced each other’s books
alternately, and sometimes finding even this association not close
enough, signed them jointly J. J. J. J. In this kind of society it is
generally difficult to be certain whether even the writings which appear
to belong to one writer only do not contain a good deal of the other’s,
and therefore to assign a sharply differential character to either: nor
is it really of much importance. The general opinion, I believe, is that
Bodmer had more originality and enterprise, Breitinger a sounder
judgment, wider learning, and a more philosophical _ethos_: but in such
collaborations the parts are almost always thus distributed. There can,
however, be no reasonable question that the pair were—more than any
other pair or person—responsible for the Rally of Germany: or rather, to
use the phrase of our saner custom, that they mark the turn of the tide
which neither they nor any one could have caused. Nor is it surprising
to find that this turn is at first almost imperceptible.

[Sidenote: _The_ Diskurse der Maler.]

The _Discourses of the Painters_ took its title directly from a sort of
coterie which Bodmer had founded; and was named, probably after Italian
models, but indirectly, as no doubt was the coterie also, from the
strong prominence in the founder’s mind of the doctrine _ut pictura
poesis_. Started in 1721, the periodical was one, and the most
important, of these imitations of _The Spectator_ which, as has been
said, played so great a part not merely in English, but in Continental,
and especially German, culture. Like the model, the copy was intended to
reform manners and morals, speech and style. In the latter respect
Bodmer did not merely follow Addison, but fell back to some extent on
the French preceptists of “correctness,” cheerfully echoing Boileau’s
recommendations of “nature,” though his eclecticism already appears in
admiration of Fontenelle likewise. As Boileau himself had made awful
examples of the extravagants of the Louis XIII. time, and as Addison had
denounced “false wit,” conceits, and so forth, so did Bodmer take up his
parable anew against the bombast and preciousness of the Lohenstein
School in German. Like both, he believes thoroughly in “Taste,” though
the “German paste” in him is not contented without an attempt at a more
philosophical treatment of this than either the Frenchman or the
Englishman had thought necessary. He makes something of a theory of
Poetry as Imitation of Nature: he refines upon the doctrines about
Imagination which he finds in Addison. But in all this there is not very
much advance upon Addison himself. Bodmer has only been brought by
Addison to the threshold of Milton, and, it would seem, not even to that
of Shakespeare,[29] while the divine, the instinctive, the all-saving
caution, _antiquam exquirite matrem_, does not in the case of old German
poetry carry him beyond Opitz as yet.

[Sidenote: _Gradual divergence from their standpoint; König on
           “Taste.”_]

For some years, therefore, it was quite possible for Swiss and Saxons to
work together. The literature of the Ancient and Modern quarrel had much
influence on both; and that odd upshot of it, the Fénelonian and La
Mothian dislike to rhyme, was destined to exercise a very great
influence in Germany. For a time, however, attention was principally
fixed on the general subject of “Taste,”[30] and a dispute, really
important in its results, if not exactly in itself, grew up round a
short dissertation by the Saxon Poet-Laureate König, and led, among
other things, to an exchange of letters between Bodmer and the Italian
Conti,[31] on the nature of this much-discussed quality or faculty.
König’s work appeared in 1727, two years before the first edition of
Gottsched’s _Dichtkunst_, but in the same year with a treatise on
Imagination from the Swiss side, in which may be seen the first sketch
of their elaborate dealings with Poetics many years later.

[Sidenote: _Main works of the Swiss School._]

By this time the tendencies of the contending parties—of Bodmer and
Breitinger in the Æsthetic-Romantic direction, and of Gottsched in the
Classical-Preceptist—had been strengthened and developed, in the one
case by study of Milton specially, in the other by that of the French:
and the gulf between them was deepened and widened in various writings,
especially in the successive editions of Gottsched’s _Dichtkunst_, and
in occasional utterances of his _Beiträge_. But the great manifestos of
the Swiss school—four in number, but it would seem representing a larger
and more uniform scheme, of which the _Imagination_ had been the
pioneer—did not appear till nearly twenty years after the first
publication of the _Diskurse_. Three of them came out at Zürich in the
single year 1740; the fourth, a year later, in 1741. The titles given
below require no comment in their exhibition of the odd enlacements of
the pair.[32]

[Sidenote: _Breitinger’s_ Kritische Dichtkunst, &c.]

Of these the _Kritische Dichtung_ is the largest, the most ambitious,
and, according to Herr Braitmaier, the most important. It was certainly
that which hurt and shocked Gottsched most, and which drew from him the
pathetically ludicrous expostulation with its unpractical character,
which was quoted in the last volume.[33] And no doubt it must appear so
to those who pay most attention to the theory of poetry in general. As
the very title shows, Breitinger here nails the poetic-pictorial
principle to the mast, and he defends it in the book itself, and in the
Dissertation on Similes, which is a sort of tender to it, with no
insufficient learning and variety of application, with reinforcements of
philosophy from Leibnitz and Wolff, even with the sketching of a “Logic
of Phantasy,” which is to be regulator and administrator of things
poetical.

[Sidenote: _Bodmer’s_ Von Dem Wunderbaren, &c.]

From my point of view, however, the most important of the four is the
_Abhandlung von dem Wunderbaren_ by Bodmer, and next to this, the same
writer’s elaborate examination, in the _Poetische Gemahlde_, of _Don
Quixote_, and of that _Durchlauchstigste Syrerin Aramena_, which is one
of the chief German Heroic Romances, and one of the literary
achievements of the House of Brunswick, having been written by Duke
Anton Ulrich. The generalities of the _Kritische Dichtkunst_ are, no
doubt, as one of the characters in _Westward Ho!_ says, “all very good
and godly”: but the unfortunate Gottsched, if he had had a little more
wit, might so have couched his complaint of their unpracticality that it
would not have been ridiculous. “Logics of Phantasy” are all very well:
doctrines that the poet must be thus and thus minded are all very well.
But we want _poems_, we want imaginative literature itself; and these
were the most difficult things in the world to get in the first half of
the eighteenth century. Bodmer, in dealing with prose fiction,
recognises, as few critics had recognised, the second greatest division
of the imaginative literature of the world—greater even than drama in a
way, because it borrows nothing from poetry, but stands on its own
merits,—the division which was at last slowly rising from the ocean
where it had been so long submerged. And in the _Dissertation on the
Wonderful_ he boldly unlocked the tabooed treasury wherein men had been
so long forbidden to seek the true riches of poetry.

There was the real _labor_, the real _opus_. It is not too much to say
that the prevailing doctrine—during the seventeenth century
increasingly, and at the beginning of the eighteenth as a recognised
orthodoxy—made poetry almost impossible. In spite of the grudging
permission of such inadequate safety-valves as _furor poeticus_, _beau
désordre_, “lucky license,” and the rest, this doctrine was that even
the _Wunderbar_ had got to submit itself to the _Wahrscheinlich_, with a
very distinct understanding that it was far the safer way to attend to
the Verisimilar and let the Wonderful alone. Even Bodmer himself seems
to have been rather led to a sounder creed by his admiration for Milton
and his revolt against such things as Voltaire’s condemnation of parts
of _Paradise Lost_,[34] than by a clear, straightforward apperception of
the prerogative of Wonder. Even he proceeds rather by extension of
“machinery,” by pointing out the capabilities and interest of the use of
Angels and the like, than by any thorough-going anticipation of the
Coleridgean “suspension of disbelief.” But this was very natural and
almost necessary: while it may be pointed out that his attention to the
Prose Romance—in which, for this reason or that, the unexpected and the
exceptional had always held rather a prominent place—tended in the same
direction as his doctrine of the Wonderful in Poetry.

[Sidenote: _Special criticisms of both._]

It is, however, only fair to say that neither Breitinger nor Bodmer
fails in that critical examination of actual literature which, as it has
been one of the objects of this book to show, is the most fruitful way
of the critic. Bodmer’s study of _Paradise Lost_, which he translated,
nay, even that of Opitz, who was edited by the pair, provided perhaps
the most important element in his critical education. And whatever gaps
there may have been in their literary accomplishment, they knew and used
the greatest critics of antiquity. If they did not know or use all its
greatest poets, they used what they did know freshly and independently.
They knew French and Italian literature fairly, and Breitinger at least
had studied the Ancient and Modern Quarrel. They knew something of
English besides Milton, though little or nothing of “Sasper,” and their
earnest and affectionate study of German literature itself, reaching
by-and-by to the treasures of the “Middle High” period, is, to me at
least, one of their greatest titles to credit. They may have pushed the
picture-poetry notion too far—Lessing was at the door with a veritable
“two-handed engine” to cut off any superfluity here. But in their time,
and in all times, it could but do more good than harm.

[Sidenote: _Bodmer’s verse criticism._]

With the commentatorial side of their activity may be connected the four
verse pieces edited with much care by Herr Baechtold in the _Deutsche
Literatur-Denkmale_.[35] The two last of these, dating from the author’s
latest years, when he felt himself among those that knew not Joseph—
_Untergang der Beruhmten Namen_, and _Bodmer nicht verkannt_—are in
hexameters, and are only pathetic curiosities. The first, _Character der
Teutschen Gedichte_, 1734, with an appendix, _Versuch einer Kritik über
die Deutschen Dichter_, and a second but more independent sequel, _Die
Drollingerische Muse_ (Drollinger was a poet and friend of Bodmer’s who
had just died), have more substantive interest.[36] They are in
Alexandrines, duly arranged with masculine and feminine alternation, and
contain not a little mostly sound criticism of mostly much-forgotten
bards.

[Sidenote: _Their later work in mediæval poetry, and their general
           position._]

I find myself, perhaps necessarily from the difference of our points of
view, again in disagreement with Herr Braitmaier as to the critical
importance of Bodmer’s later industry (shared again in part by
Breitinger) on older German literature. To me, the mere fact that Bodmer
in 1748—that is to say, before the middle of the eighteenth century, and
nearly twenty years before the appearance of Percy’s _Reliques_—
published with his faithful double J. J. his _Specimens of Old Suabian
Poetry_, the Middle High German poetry of the thirteenth century; nine
or ten years later, and still before Percy, before Hurd, _Fabeln aus der
Zeiten der Minnesänger_; with, later again, parts of the
_Nibelungenlied_ and collections of Minnesong itself, is, as perhaps the
reader knows by this time, an almost greater claim to importance in the
_History of Criticism and Literary Taste_ than his earlier directly
critical work, and a much greater one than the more abstract æsthetic
inquiries of Breitinger even, still more of Baumgarten and Sulzer and
the rest. Taken with these earlier inquiries they give him and his
coadjutor a high and most memorable place in the general story of the
appreciation of literature. He was certainly not a man of much—and
Breitinger does not seem to have been one of any—original poetical
power; he does not himself seem to have had even so much as his
colleague had of learning or acuteness: and both were _echt Deutsch_ in
their long-windedness and want of concinnity. But they did what they
could; and it turned out that they had done a great deal.

[Sidenote: _The “Swiss-Saxon” quarrel._]

Of the famous “Swiss-Saxon” quarrel[37] which followed the publication
of Breitinger’s _Kritische Dichtkunst_ and Gottsched’s denunciation
thereof in a new edition of his own, I shall, according to my previous
practice, say little. It has in all the books the usual disproportionate
prominence of such things, and its actual importance was even less than
usual. A brief but good account of it, and of all the underground
jealousies and littlenesses that led up to it, may be found in
Braitmaier. These jealousies, especially the general revolt against the
sort of tyranny of letters which Gottsched’s skilful management of his
periodicals and his pedagogic temper had instituted, were much more
noticeable in it than any clear classic-romantic “dependence.” But, _on
the whole_, the revolt against Gottsched was in the direction of revolt
against at least Neo-Classicism. By degrees, too, it branched out into
an attack on, and a defence of, two particular poets—Haller and
Klopstock; and though neither of these is very delectable “to us,” both
were distinctly in their time champions of the freedom of the poetic
Jerusalem. It was fought out in Gottsched’s _Beiträge_ on his side, and
in a kind of periodical entitled _Sammlung Kritischer, poetischer, und
geistvoller Schriften_, which Bodmer brought out in opposition,[38] in
divers others,[39] and in numerous pamphlets. The most important critics
whom it produced, and these indirectly for the most part, were the elder
Schlegels, especially the eldest, Johann Elias, who, from a contributor,
though never exactly a partisan, of Gottsched, became one of the objects
of his special indignation. Of others, Schwabe, Cramer, Mylius, Pyra, we
can but take note in passing here. Gellert has been mentioned in the
last volume.[40]

[Sidenote: _The elder Schlegels: Johann Adolf._]

If not every schoolboy, every one with the slightest tincture of
letters, is supposed to be aware that there were two persons of the name
of Schlegel, who are of very great account in German and in European
criticism. Not merely the schoolboy, but the person ordinarily tinged
with letters, may perhaps be excused if he does not know that at
least[41] _four_ of the name and family have claim to rank here—Johann
Elias, his younger brother Johann Adolf, August Wilhelm, and Karl
Wilhelm Friedrich, these two last being sons of Johann Adolf. Of these
the elder pair concern us in this particular place. And of them it will
be most convenient to take Johann Adolf first, not for the sake of his
famous offspring, but because his critical work is the less important.
He took part in the obscure and uninteresting squabble over the Pastoral
school,[42] but his main contribution to our subject is a translation,
with notes and elaborate _Abhandlungen_, of Batteux. In this, published
as early as 1751, and reprinted later,[43] he is still an evidence of
the domination of French, which his more original brother at least
partly rejected. But there are signs and tokens. He is constantly making
respectful suggestions and limitations: “This conclusion is too large,”
“this is true _to a certain extent_,” and so forth.

The _Abhandlungen_ show the German tendency to generalisation and
abstract disquisition:—On the Origin of Arts, the Building up of Taste,
the divisions of Poetry, its foundation in imitation or illusion, its
distinction from History, and from Ornate Prose, &c. Schlegel is very
much cumbered about Kinds, insists that we must try each new kind and
see whether it comes naturally or not. If it does, that is right. The
Wonderful has “a natural right to please us, a right founded in the
constitution of our souls.” The soul demands novelty, &c. But like his
part-master, Gottsched, he is very doubtful about Ariosto and Milton
(Death and Sin are such “_shadowy_ persons”!), and I do not think he
mentions Shakespeare. He has a considerable position in the list of
writers on German versification, a subject which was acquiring much
importance from the set against rhyme, mentioned above.

[Sidenote: _Johann Elias._]

His elder brother, Johann Elias, is a much more original and independent
person. The very high claims made for him by his editor, Herr von
Antoniewicz,[44] and by Herr Braitmaier, may require some deduction when
we consider his actual work; but not much. He died (1749) at a little
over thirty: and during this short life he had been a diplomatist, a
professor, a prolific and remarkable dramatist, and a miscellaneous
poet. So that he had not much time to spare for criticism. But his work
in it has that rare quality, or combination of qualities, which we have
noted in Dryden, the quality of marking and learning the things that a
man reads and writes of, and correcting himself by both processes. It is
quite astonishing to read his first critical work, a “Letter on Ancient
and Modern Tragedy,” and to note, though his actual standpoint is not
very advanced, the thoroughness and freshness of appreciation shown by a
boy of one-and-twenty, in the very dawn and almost the twilight of the
great period of German literature. Other interesting papers lead to the
still more remarkable review of Borck’s prose translation of _Julius
Cæsar_, with its parallel between that play and the _Leo Armenius_ of
the German seventeenth-century dramatist, Andreas Gryphius. There is, of
course, a danger, if this be uncritically read, of our failing to grasp
Schlegel’s standpoint in regard to both the subjects, and of the
excellent Gryph appearing to us too much in the light in which
Shakespeare himself appeared to Voltaire. Moreover, the German
Alexandrine is—even to an ear broken to a thousand measures in half a
dozen languages—one of the most disagreeable that can be found. But
allow for all these things, as criticism demands, and you will have a
piece of appreciation such as (so far at least as I know) had not
appeared in German before, and one of which, _æquatis æquandis_, hardly
any of the greatest English or French critics since need have been
ashamed in his _Lehrjahre_. The discussions of Imitation,[45] which the
lovers of abstract criticism seem to regard as Schlegel’s greatest title
to fame, and which are certainly his largest, though very sound and
stimulating for their time, and not even obsolete in regard to the
“realist” and “naturalist” debates of the latest nineteenth century, are
a little scholastic in method. From reading some estimates of Schlegel
the student might almost be prepared to find in him a promulgation of
one of the last secrets of criticism, the discovery that not only need
you not always realise but you nearly always must _dis_realise—give the
things as they are _not_ in nature; and that by no means merely to
suppress uglinesses and the like. So far as this I do not think he gets
anywhere,[46] but he gets pretty far: and his argument was most valuable
at the time when Gottsched was priding himself on having once more based
Poetic on a rigid Imitation-principle. But some of the best of
Schlegel’s work is to be found in the last example of it, the “Gedanken
zur Aufnahme des Dänischen Theaters,” where the good and bad points of
both English and French drama, and the imitation or avoidance which they
deserve accordingly, are set forth with an insight, a range, and a power
of appreciation which do not come much behind Lessing, not to mention an
impartiality which Lessing by no means always shows. In the
Shakespeare-and-Gryph parallel Johann Elias had practically founded
German Shakespeare-study, and in this piece he takes the line necessary
to prevent a too one-sided pursuit of it. His actual critical
achievement is not, and could not be, large; but it is precious in
itself, and it shows that, had he lived, there was almost nothing at all
possible in his time that he might not have done in criticism. You could
trust him, I think, on the English novel, and you could trust him on
German and mediæval poetry, with the certainty that, in the long-run at
any rate, he would come

right.

[Sidenote: _Moses Mendelssohn._]

Of the praiseworthy industry of Nicolai we have spoken in the last
volume: and the only critic whom it is necessary to mention in any
detail before passing to Lessing, who is himself in a way the critical
sum and substance as well as the crown and flower of this period—Moses
Mendelssohn—belongs rather to the æstheticians pure and simple. He did,
however, much solid actual critical work, to a great extent in
collaboration with both of the persons just mentioned. Those who are
curious about him may consult the very extensive (indeed, I fear it must
rather be called the disproportionately extensive) notice of him by Herr
Braitmaier, who gives this learned Jew some two-thirds of his second
volume, and not much less than one-third of his whole book. Mendelssohn,
however, is really an important person in the history of German
criticism, and probably counted for something in the development of
Lessing, who was his intimate friend. He seems to have had little
tincture of classical literature, but was intensely interested in
modern; and was for some twenty years a constant reviewer of it. He
inclines somewhat to the moral rather than to the purely literary
judgment in his notices of English writers, even of Shakespeare, much
more of Young and Richardson, and he was not disposed to accept the
Wartonian view of Pope. Indeed, with all his merits he seems to me to be
further “below proof,” from the literary point of view, not merely than
Lessing but than J. E. Schlegel. The actual critical work[47] of this
Moses, as shown in his collected writings, leaves us, if not in the
depths of the wilderness, at any rate at some distance from the Promised
Land. There is a certain amount of criticism in his _Letters_, and he
illustrates eighteenth-century tendencies by writing on _Das Erhabene
und das Naïve_. His general drift is very frankly displayed in the
epistles of Aristes to Hylas, on “How the Young should read Old and New
Poetry,” where Plutarch’s title[48] is not more closely followed than
his spirit. The treatise, though in no way contemptible, is one of those
which have been described (no doubt by a reminiscence of Hobbes) as “all
_-keit_ and _-lung_.” And Mendelssohn’s attitude to criticism could not
be better indicated than in the following sentence:[49] “We laugh at
Regnard’s _Le Joueur_ and avoid being called gamblers; we weep over the
English _Gamester_ and are ashamed to be such.” Perhaps so; perhaps also
not. But the symptoms, if existent, are quite compatible with the
existence of any degree of literary merit in either case, if not also
with the existence of none.

Baumgarten, Sulzer, and some others must be relegated to the Æsthetic
pound.

[Sidenote: _Lessing._]

The general reputations which are wholly or mainly founded on criticism
are so few that it behoves the historian thereof to approach them with
unusual circumspection, to “put on the inquirer’s holy robe and a purged
considerate mind,” as Mr Arnold says. There is the obvious danger of
merely indorsing the general opinion in a tame and banal assentation;
and there is the not much less obvious (and perhaps not a little
greater) danger of succumbing to the temptation of “saying something
different”—of aiming at a cheap distinction by paradox or eccentricity.
Perhaps it is even easier to escape these dangers in reality than to
seem to escape them: more particularly in the case of Lessing, of whom,
in England at least, almost every educated person knows that he was a
great critic, while only specialists know much more.

[Sidenote: _Some cautions respecting him._]

That he was a great critic nobody can deny: but it is perhaps desirable
to warn those who come to him knowing something of literary criticism
already, and expecting great things in it from him, that they should not
raise their expectations too high, and that they should thoroughly
master certain preliminary facts. The most important of these is that
Lessing’s interests were not, as the interests of very great critics
almost invariably have been, either wholly literary, or literary first
of all, or, as in Aristotle’s case, as literary as possible. As it was
said of Clarissa that “there is always something that she prefers to the
truth,” so there is nearly always something that Lessing prefers to
literature, constantly as he was occupied with books. Now it is the
theatre;[50] now it is art—especially art viewed from the side of
archæology; now it is classical scholarship of the minuter kind; now
philosophy or theology; now it is morals; not unfrequently it is more,
or fewer, or all of these things together, which engage his attention
while literature is left out in the cold.

[Sidenote: _His moral obsession; on_ Soliman the Second.]

The most curious instance of his moral preoccupation (which, as the
commonest and that with which we are most familiar, we may get rid of
first) has reference[51] to Marmontel’s _conte_ of _Soliman the
Second_.[52] Lessing rather liked Marmontel, who had been civil to _Miss
Sara Sampson_, I think, and whom he somewhere couples with Diderot,
thereby showing that he at any rate was able to distinguish in the
author of the _Eléments de Littérature_ something very different from a
_perruque_. He admits “the wit, the knowledge of the world, the
elegance, the grace” of this “excellent and delightful” tale. But he is
fearfully disturbed at its morality. The Sultan, it seems, is “a
satiated libertine”; [but would not Rymer be for once justified in
urging this as “a character worn by them in all ages of the world” in
which there were Sultans?] Roxelane is “a baggage which gets its way.”
[Undoubtedly: but do not baggages as a rule get theirs?] Lessing,
however, cannot away with “the thing,” as he calls the owner of the
_petit nez retroussé_. What a wretched part is the great Soliman made to
play! He and Roxelane “belong neither to the actual world, nor to a
world in which cause and effect follow a different order, but to the
general effect of good.” “The Turk only knows sensual love” [Rymer!
Rymer!]. Lessing is afraid that the _lune rousse_ will rise for Soliman
on the very morrow of his wedding: and that he will see in Roxelane
“nothing but her impudence and the _nez retroussé_.” [Now as these were
the very things that captivated him, it might rather seem that all would
be well.] In Soliman the instructive is lacking. “We ought to despise
both him and Roxelane; or rather one [which one?] ought to disgust and
the other to anger us,” though, or perhaps more particularly, _because_
“they are painted in the most seductive colours.”

There is really nothing to be said to this but ὦ πόποι! In the first
place, all this good moral indignation simply explodes through the
touch-hole. The tale is pure satire on the _actual_ weakness of man and
triumph of woman—and this actuality who dare deny? If Lessing does not
think both Soliman and Roxelane natural, so much the worse for Lessing.
In the second place, neither is in the least degree held up for our
admiration, though the skill of the artist may deserve that admiration
in almost the highest degree. We may, if we like, pronounce Soliman a
weak man and rather immoral ruler, and suspect Roxelane (as he suspected
her himself) of being very little better than she should be. But not
only does the critic waste his powder in the direction in which he
actually fires; he loses the opportunity of bringing down excellent
game. He lets slip altogether (as Tassoni[53] had _not_ altogether,
though he did not follow it out) the chance of arguing that most
important and interesting critical question of the attraction of the
irregular, the unexpected, the capricious, the teasing. He might have
got “instruction” to his heart’s content, for us and for himself, out of
this shocking story of the great Sultan and the _petit nez retroussé_.
Surely it were better done thus to profit by the curves of Roxelane’s
countenance than to read us a dull sermon on her want of moral
rectitude? But Lessing does not think so—master though he be, at least
according to German notions, of that very irony which should have kept
him right.

[Sidenote: _The strictures on Ariosto’s portrait of Alcina._]

His merely dramatic and his merely artistic preoccupations deserve less
severe treatment, because it cannot be said that they lead him wrong or
even astray, except from our special point of view. But from that
special point of view they _do_ lead him astray: at least in the sense
that he becomes sometimes unimportant to us. In the whole of the
_Laocoön_, reserving a point to be returned to later, I remember only
one passage of any length which is really literary,[54] and that is the
famous and not undeserved, but somewhat insufficiently worked out,
censure of Ariosto’s description of Alcina.[55] Here Lessing does show
what a critic he is by his triumphant demonstration that the carefully
accumulated strokes which would in the sister art go towards making, if
they would not completely make, a most attractive _picture_, produce
very little definite effect as a _passage_. Even here he allows himself
to be called off from the discovery which he was on the point, it might
seem, of making. He excepts for praise the beautiful—in fact consummate—
simile of the breasts which—

                “Vengono e van, come onda al primo margo
                quando piacevole aura il mar combatte.”

Here of course the charm arises from the fact that the image is _new_,
personal—that is to say, that it is _literary_. The curves of the
wind-engrailed surge on the sand are not Vida’s “stealings,” they are
originals—whoso takes them will not make them, though in themselves they
remain delightful for ever. They are like the “chrysoprase” eyes of
Clarimonde in Gautier’s _Morte Amoureuse_, which make that piece
immortal. The man who _now_ gives us eyes of chrysoprase might as well
make them gooseberries. Lessing does not say this, does not hint it:
indeed (as Lamb’s Scotchman would point out) it would have been, in
reference to the _Morte Amoureuse_, impossible for him to do so. But he
is on the way to saying it, and he instigates others to do so if he does
not.[56]

[Sidenote: Hamlet _and_ Semiramis.]

The objection indeed which may be most justly taken to these dramatic
and artistic preoccupations is that they too often directly prevent him
in this way from doing what he might have done. The _Dramaturgie_ is to
the student of properly literary criticism a mixture of irritation and
delight—a parallel to Coleridge’s conversation, in which “glorious”
literary “islets” constantly loom through the dramatic haze, and then
get engulfed again. How admirable in principle that comparison[57] of
Voltaire’s and of Shakespeare’s ghosts! Yet how we sigh for concrete
illustrations from the actual _words_—for a little, little
_Zusammensetzung_, say, of

                         “This eternal blazon,”

—three words only, but three words with the whole soul of poetry in
them, and of

                  “Arrête! et respecte ma cendre.”[58]

[Sidenote: _The_ Comte d’Essex, Rodogune, Mérope.]

The defence of Thomas Corneille’s _Comte d’Essex_[59] against Voltaire’s
unhistorical history is very good; but then it is so unnecessary! and in
the longest criticisms of all, those given to the greater Corneille s
_Rodogune_[60] and to Maffei’s and Voltaire’s _Merope_[61] (once more
one wishes that Lessing could have taken in Mr Arnold’s), the
entanglements of the preoccupation reach, for a literary critic, the
exasperating.

[Sidenote: _Lessing’s Gallophobia_]

The truth is that in reading the _Dramaturgie_[62] one cannot help
remembering Carlyle’s capital complaint of Voltaire that “to him the
Universe was one larger patrimony of St Peter from which it were good
and pleasant to chase the Pope,” and regretting that Lessing should have
thought it necessary to substitute Voltaire himself for the Holy Father.
It was inevitable perhaps and necessary for the time: but the result is
tedious. And unfortunately this Gallophobia in general, this
Corneliophobia and Voltairiophobia in particular, affects, and very
unfavourably affects, those rectifications and reconstructions of
Aristotle which have given the _Dramaturgie_ its great reputation. With
all his talent, all his freshness, Lessing is to a very great extent
merely varying the Addisonian error—and indeed, as with all these early
German critics, Addison himself had too great an influence on him. As
Addison had wasted his powers on showing that Milton, whom the
pseudo-Aristotelians had decried, was very Aristotelian, or at least
Homeric, after all, so Lessing devotes a most unnecessary amount of
energy to showing that the pseudo-Aristotelians themselves were not
Aristotelian at all. It was true; it was in a sense well worth doing;
but there was so much else to do! There is a famous passage at the
beginning of No. 7 which itself really annihilates the whole proceeding,
and laughs “boundary lines of criticism” out of court. Nor is Lessing’s
aberration a mere accidental one. It comes from the fact that he had not
cleared up his own mind on some important parts of the question. He
says, for instance, in his criticism of _Rodogune_ (No. 31, beginning),
“The revenge of an ambitious woman should never resemble that of a
jealous one.” _Æternum vulnus!_ What is “_the_ revenge of _an_ ambitious
woman?” “_the_ revenge of _a_ jealous one?” Show me the revenge of your
jealous Amaryllis, the revenge of your ambitious Neæra; and _then_ I
will tell you whether they are right or not.

[Sidenote: _and typomania._]

The fact is, that on what we may call the other side of his virtue—to
call it the defect of his quality would be rather to beg the question—he
is, after all, a preceptist with some difference. Not merely is he an
unflinching and almost “right-or-wrong” Aristotelian, but from genuine
agreement of taste and judgment he still criticises almost wholly by
Kinds. It is _the_ drama, _the_ epic, _the_ fable, _the_ lyric, _the_
epigram that he makes for, across or sometimes almost outside of the
actual examples of their classes. And here, too, we find that the more
poetical divisions and the more poetical aspects of these and others
have no very special appeal to him. He belittles Lyric altogether; if he
is particularly fond of the Fable in the special sense, it is because it
also has a “fable” in the general, it is an imitation of life, a
criticism of it. His attempt to prove that Horace had no looking-glasses
in his bedroom[63] is a pleasant pendant to his indignation with
Roxalana’s _minois chiffonné_: and though there is a great deal to be
said for Martial, Lessing[64] is bribed to adopt the _vita proba_ view
rather by the Roman poet’s intense _vivacity_ than by his literary
merit.

[Sidenote: _His study of antiquity more than compensating._]

Yet this, once more, is but “the other side of a virtue.” The best
authorities agree that to Lessing may be assigned absolutely the return
to, if not the very initiation of,[65] a direct, scholarly, intelligent,
_literary_ study of the ancients themselves. As far as the Greek Theatre
itself is concerned, Brumoy had anticipated him: far too little justice
has often been done to the work of this modest and solid scholar. But
Brumoy’s outlook was wanting in range. Lessing had in his mind, as well
as Latin and Greek, English,[66] French and German always, Italian, even
Spanish[67] to some extent. And he read the Latin and the Greek in
themselves—and with all due apparatus of technical scholarship
considering his time. He was as far from the twice- and thrice-garbled
sciolism of the average French, and even English, critic of the late
seventeenth and earlier eighteenth century, as from the arid pedantry of
the Dutch and German scholars of the same date. To him, more perhaps
than to any one else, it is due that modern criticism has not followed,
more than it has done, the mere foolishness of the “modern” advocates in
the Quarrel—that it has fortified itself with those sound and solid
studies which antiquity alone can supply. For once more let it be said
that if, from the pure critical point of view, Ancient without Modern is
a stumbling-block, Modern without Ancient is foolishness utter and
irremediable.

[Sidenote: _And especially of Aristotle._]

Perhaps Lessing’s greatest glory is that he has given answer to the
despairing question which his master quoted in the Ethics.[68] “If the
water chokes, what must one drink on the top of it?” “More and purer
water” is that answer, of course: and Lessing scoured the clogged and
stagnant channels of Neo-Classicism by recurrence to the original fount.
Of course he was not himself absolutely original. He owed something to
Heinsius, in that most remarkable tractate to which we did justice in
its place, among the more distant moderns, to Dacier, pedant as he is,
to Brumoy, to Hurd among the nearer. But more than to any of them he
devoted himself to the real text of the _Poetics_, interpreted by a
combination of scholarship and mother-wit. To this day he has to be
consulted upon the _cruces_ of Fable and Character, of Unity, of
knotting and unknotting, of _katharsis_.[69] That he has said no final
word on them matters nothing: final words are not to be said on things
of opinion and probability

              Until God’s great _Venite_ change the song.

But on these and not a few other matters he reorganised the whole method
and the whole tenor of the inquiry. And so he not only earns his own
place in the story, but half unintentionally establishes, or helps us to
establish, the great truth that the whole _is_ a story, a history, a
chain of opinion and comment on opinion, now going more, now less,
right, but to be kept as a chain.

[Sidenote: _With whom he combines Diderot._]

Nothing can illustrate this better than the fact that Lessing’s second
master in criticism is—Diderot! He does not regard that erratic and
_cometic_ genius as he regards Aristotle, he does not think the _Bijoux
Indiscrets_, and the remarks on the _Fils Naturel_, and the rest, as
being “as infallible as the _Elements of Euclid_.”[70] He would have
disqualified himself from serious consideration if he had. He dissents
from some of Diderot’s opinions; he combats some of his arguments. But
he admits, almost in so many words, and in a constant attitude which is
more valuable than any verbal admission, that this most irregular,
revolutionary, _casual_ of modern thinkers has set him on his own path
of independent revaluation of critical principles.

[Sidenote: _His deficiencies in regard to mediæval literature._]

And we find confirmation of this in those of his critical writings which
have not yet been mentioned, as well as illustrations of other critical
characteristics in him. It is curious that Lessing, so sensitive and
receptive to ancient and later modern influences, is almost as proof
against mediæval and (in his own language) early modern as Gottsched
himself. His low estimate of Lyric seems to come partly from the fact
that Aristotle had slighted it, or at least passed it over, partly from
the fact that in relation to Germany he is not thinking of her ballads
and lays, not even of the extravagances of the seventeenth century, but
of the tame Anacreontic of Hagedorn, Gleim, and Company. Even his study
of Shakespeare has not set him right in this respect. It is most curious
to read his contemporary Hurd, a contemporary for whom Lessing had a
just respect, and to remember that Hurd could appreciate not merely both
Aristotle and Shakespeare, but both Horace and Spenser. And there are
few things which bring out more clearly that immense debt to Shakespeare
and Spenser themselves which has been insisted on as due by English
criticism. It was too early for Lessing to have gone back to Gottfried
and Walther;[71] the German Renaissance had nothing (save the ballads,
which he would not have) to offer him.

[Sidenote: _The close of the_ Dramaturgie _and its moral_.]

The greatest places of the _Dramaturgie_ are those at the close of No.
95, and the penultimate passage of all. In the former, after a long
discussion of the Aristotelian commentaries of Hurd and Dacier, he
refashions his master’s famous dictum in other matter, that “accuracy
must not be expected.” He is not, he says, “obliged to solve all the
problems he raises.” His thoughts may seem desultory, or even
contradictory: but it does not matter if they supply others with the
germ of individual thought. He would but scatter “_fermenta
cognitionis_.” In the other, he proceeds still farther, though still
perhaps without a clear idea how far the path itself will lead. Germans,
he says (I shorten somewhat here), had imitated the French because the
French were believed to be your only followers of the ancients. Then
English plays came in, an entirely different style of drama was
revealed, and the Germans concluded that the aim of tragedy could be
fulfilled without the French rules—that the rules were wrong. And then
they went on to object to rules altogether as mere genius-hampering
pedantry. “In short, we had very nearly thrown away in wantonness all
past experience, insisting that the poet shall in every instance
discover the whole art for himself.” Lessing has endeavoured “to arrest
this secondary fermentation,” and that is all.

Invaluable words! and, if somewhat extra-literary,—or, from another
point of view, directed to too narrow a part of literature,—yet in their
true acceptation governing and guiding the whole method, the entire
campaign, of literary criticism. Whether Lessing had taken any
suggestion from Batteux,[72] who had written long before him, I do not
know: but the different attitude of the French critic and the German is
most interesting, and gives the reason why we have treated Batteux in
the last volume and are treating Lessing in this. Both writers perceive,
each in his own fashion, that every work of genius is, or at any rate
contains, a rule. I do not even know that it can be denied that Lessing,
almost as much as Batteux, though under happier stars, has an idea of
working out one general rule of all the particulars—a process which is
but too likely to lead back again into the House of Bondage; but his
actual notion takes a far more catholic form, leads far more directly to
the way of salvation. You must study each work of genius in order to get
its contribution to the Inner Rule, the highest formula. And if you do
this all will be well. It is not the Rule—as some falsely hold, and as
perhaps some even have falsely thought that the present writer holds—
that does the harm, but its exclusive and disfranchising application _a
priori_—not even the Kind, but its elevation into a caste, with the
correlative institution of pariahdom. And Lessing’s principle of never
neglecting study of former experience saves this danger at once.[73]

[Sidenote: _Miscellaneous specimens of his criticism._]

But the twenty volumes of Lessing’s Works, or rather the round dozen,
more or less, of them which contain or concern criticism, are not to be
passed over without some more detailed mention. The first contains
(besides the early and not uninteresting Preface to his collected
_Poems_ in 1753) the famous Dissertations on the Fable, which, whether
one agrees or not with them, give an admirable example of the
thoroughness, the sense, and the scholarship of Lessing’s critical
method. He lays out the history of opinion on his subject from Aristotle
and Aphthonius to Breitinger and Batteux; he combats, not long-windedly
but scientifically, those opinions with which he disagrees; he sets
forth his own with such further disposition of the subject as he thinks
proper. And in sixty pages he has given as masterly an example of
“criticism on a _kind_,” of general criticism (for we must maintain the
reservations above outlined), as need be desired—an example uniting
antique clearness and proportion, scholastic method, and modern vivacity
and illustrative variety. A somewhat different kind of document, but the
kind which we have so often looked for in vain hitherto, is given by the
great mass of reviews, literary letters, the rhetorical discussions of
various kinds, and the like, which fill four successive volumes.[74]
From the very first, written when Lessing was but two-and-twenty, his
scholarship, his reading, and his formidable and rather aggressive
intellectual ability, appear unmistakably. Much is mere abstract, but
more independent work appears from the long and early criticism of the
_Captivi_[75] to the review of Meinhardt’s _Italian Poets_, which came
just before the _Laocoön_.

Here may be found all manner of dealings with interesting and
heterogeneous subjects and persons, from Rousseau’s Dijon Discourse
through Klopstock and Piron, Bodmer’s sacred epics (“Three Epic Poets in
Germany at once!” says Lessing, setting the tone of mischievous
reviewing early; “too much! too much of a good thing!”), and “Gentil”
Bernard on the Art of Love, to elaborate dissertations on Simon Lemnius,
the author of that edifying work the _Monachopornomachia_.[76] And
later,[77] in more extensive reference to German Literature, much about
the early work of Klopstock and Wieland, a sustained polemic against
Gottsched, ranging from serious attacks on his authority as a literary
historian and critic to “skits” tending to prove that he was the author
of _Candide_,[78] not unaccompanied by businesslike abstracts of the
critic’s own work to adjust the same to more general acceptance.[79]

Of the _Kleinere Philologische Abhandlungen_, which fill the 15th
volume, the curious “Rettungen des Horaz” have been glanced at above.
The opening “Vademecum für Lange,” a vitriolic and practically
destructive retort on that blundering translator of Horace himself, who
had not had the sense to sit down quietly under a severe but not
offensive review of Lessing’s, is one of the capital examples of its
kind—a kind questionable but sometimes to be allowed. The “Anmerkungen
über das Epigramm,” the principal single constituent of the volume,[80]
are very noteworthy. The rest consist mainly of textual and other
animadversions of the kind which we reluctantly leave out here from the
Renaissance downward. The chief are on Paulus Silentiarius, and on that
interesting book the fables of the so-called _Anonymus Neveleti_.

He returns to this in one[81] of the numerous papers of vol. xvi.,
another collection of notes, notices (some of Old German Literature),
and reviews, the last mostly very short and sometimes a little
perfunctory. What might have been the most, and is not the least,
interesting of these,[82] has for subject a German translation of the
first two volumes of _The Rambler_ in 1754. Lessing does not name
Johnson, nor does he seem to know anything about him; but he praises the
Essays highly. Now, if you could have combined the good points of these
two, and “sprinkled in,” as Mambrun might say,[83] a little _furor
romanticus_, it would have been difficult to get a better critical
mixture than the result.

The still further collection of critical miscellanea in vol. xix. is
mostly philosophical or, according to Lessing’s unfortunate later habit,
theological in character,[84] but the long “Pope als Metaphysiker”
deserves mention as at least partially literary and as more than
partially good. Finally, the numerous and not seldom interesting notes
or motes of the _Kollectaneen_ or Commonplace Book published after
Lessing’s death, though they frequently approach or flit round strictly
literary criticism, never, I think, actually constitute it.[85]

[Sidenote: _His attitude to Æschylus and Aristophanes._]

In the case of so great a name occupying the most prominent position at
the last turning-point of the recorded critical course, it is necessary
to insist on those reserves which have been made already. Everybody who
has read Lessing carefully must have noticed, whether with immediate
understanding of the reason or not, the very small attention which he
pays to two writers in his own favourite department, whom some would
call the very greatest in it, as far as Greece is concerned, and to whom
hardly any nowadays would deny a place among the greatest of Greece or
of the world—that is to say, Æschylus and Aristophanes. His defenders
are prompt with an excuse at least as damaging as most excuses. People
did not, says Lessing’s very able and very erudite commentator, M. Kont,
fully understand in those days the importance of Æschylus in connection
with Greek myths: and the forms of drama which he, and still more
Aristophanes, adopted were unsuitable to that modern use and application
which Lessing always had at heart. Alas! the value of an author in
connection with Greek myths is so exceedingly indifferent to literature!
and his value as helping to fill a stage at the present day is also of
so very little importance! If ignorance of one of these things and
consciousness of the absence of the other determined Lessing’s neglect
of the greatest tragic poet of Greece,—of the greatest comic poet,
except Shakespeare, of the world,—then it will be but too clear that
whatever Lessing cared most for, it was not poetry,—that his care for
poetry as such—nay, for literature as such—was even rather small. To
call him a “king of criticism” is foolish, because that is just what he
is not. He is grand-duke of not a few critical provinces which, somehow
or other, he never can consolidate into a universal monarchy of critical
wit.

Let me, however, assure any of my readers who are apt to regard as
“unfriendly” or “unsympathetic” criticism which is not eulogy thick and
slab, neat and unmixed, that there is no intention here of belittling
Lessing’s critical qualities,[86] only one of indicating critically what
they were and what they were not. The gift of critical expression he
most certainly had in a very high degree. His exposition is masterly:
though he is constantly, as has been said, leading the discussion aside
from concrete to abstract, and from particular to general points, he is
scarcely ever obscure, confused, or vague. His language is precise,
without being technical or jargonish. He has something of the German
lack of urbanity, but he often has a felicity of expression that is
French rather than German, with depth and humour which are far more
German than French. Never has one of the tricks of the critical pedant—
common to the kind in our day as in his—been so happily described as in
the opening of _Wie die Alten den Tod gebildeten_: “Herr Klotz always
thinks he is at my heels. But when I look back at his yelp, I see him
lost in a cloud of dust quite astray from the road I have trodden.”[87]
The unlucky distraction of his later years, to theological or
anti-theological squabbling may—nay, must—have lost us much. But as it
is, he never fails for long together to give those _fermenta
cognitionis_ of which he speaks. He is always “for thoughts”: that
fecundity, as a result of the critical congress, which we shall remark
in his part-master Diderot, is everywhere present in him.

[Sidenote: _Frederic the Great._]

Lessing, whom the king neglected, may suggest Frederic the Great, whose
_De la Littérature Allemande_ (1780) the Germans have most forgivingly
translated into the language despised by the writer, and adopted as a
“monument” of its literature.[88] It is certainly a monument of a kind,
and the most striking contrast possible to Lessing’s work. I shall not
say that it shows, as a Carlylian not less fervent than myself[89] has
admitted of Frederic’s historian on Marryat, that Frederic “was stupid
for once in his life.” But it certainly shows that he could be absurdly
narrow and perverse, and could push the confidence of ignorance to a
wonderful length. That Frederic _was_ very ignorant of literature there
is no doubt. It is known that he “had small Latin[90] and _no_ Greek”;
his expressions about English, the language and the literature, in this
very tractatule, are, if possible, more impudently ignorant than those
about German: he does not, I think, so much as name a Spanish author;
and his references to Italian might have been, and probably were,
derived from mere hearsay.

All this was a good preparation for judging a literature in the very
peculiar state of German in 1780, when, to do it justice, a man should
have had the knowledge, then almost impossible, of the various periods
from “Middle High” onwards, the power to appreciate its very different
phases, which few had, and the power, which hardly anybody ever has, of
appreciating the literary present, and even future. But Frederic need
not have made so near an approach to stupidity as he makes here.[91]

[Sidenote: De la Littérature Allemande.]

That there is considerable truth and shrewdness in the king’s censure of
his subjects’ pedantry and want of taste is quite certain; that the
German language was in a less favourable condition for literature than
any other of the great European languages is certain also. Many of his
practical precepts are as sensible as we should expect from a man so
great in affairs. But his literary criticism is rather worse than we
should expect even from a disciple of Voltaire, whose pet prejudices
they not merely reflect but exaggerate. Of all the “answers” (a most
interesting list of which, with account of them where possible, from
that one of Goethe’s, which has the here most deplorable “defect of
being lost,” downwards, will be found in Herr Geiger’s Introduction) the
happiest is in three words of Herder’s, which describe the treatise as
“_ein comisches Meisterstück_.”[92] Frederic attributes to Horace, and
in the _Ars Poetica_ too, four words[93] which do not occur there, which
would not be very easy to get into the metre without destroying their
juxtaposition, and which it would be not much easier to adjust to any
context of the actual piece. He attributes to Aristotle not merely the
Three Unities, but instead of the “Unity of _Action_” the “Unity of
_Interest_,” thus handing over

the whole position to the anti-Aristotelians after a fashion which, if
one of the king’s own generals had imitated it in actual war, would have
“broken” him for life, if it had not put him against a wall, and
opposite to a file of grenadiers. He thinks that Epictetus and Marcus
Aurelius wrote in Latin; that Toland wrote the _Leviathan_; that Marot,
Rabelais, and Montaigne wrote a jargon at least as bad as any German—
“gross and destitute of grace.” In the most celebrated passage[94]—
perhaps the only one generally known—he not only out-Voltaires Voltaire
by speaking of the “abominable pieces of Shakespeare,” those absurd
“farces worthy of Canadian savages,” but stigmatises _Goetz von
Berlichingen_ as a “detestable imitation” of them. He hardly knows of
any other German writers, and of those whom he praises Gellert and
Gessner are the only ones who have retained the least reputation. If for
one thing that he did—the injunction to write in German and not take
refuge in other languages—one is tempted to spare him, the merit almost
disappears when one remembers that he meant the German to be written in
the teeth of the natural bent of the language. The bulk of his positive
directions has nothing to do with literature whatsoever, but with the
teaching of physical science, of law, &c. And the real apex of the
_comisches Meisterstück_ (for Herder’s words are too good not to be
repeated) is to be found at the end. He prophesies, and (such is the
unending and unfathomable irony of Fate!) he prophesies quite truly,
that “the palmy days of our Literature have not come, but they are
approaching,” that he is their harbinger, that they are just about to
appear, “that though he shall not see them, his age making it hopeless,
he, like Moses, sees the Promised Land, but must not enter it.” The
inevitable jests at Moses himself, and the bare “rocks of sterile
Idumea,” follow. But it was Moses who laughed last. Every word of
Frederic’s prophecy came true; but it was because Germany neglected
every item of Frederic’s prescription. The palmy days did come: they
lasted for fifty glorious years and (with Heine) longer. But their light
was the light borrowed from the abominable Shakespeare, and their leader
was the author of _Goetz von Berlichingen_.[95]




                              CHAPTER III.

                        THE ENGLISH PRECURSORS.

THE FIRST GROUP—MEDIÆVAL REACTION—GRAY—PECULIARITY OF HIS CRITICAL
    POSITION—THE LETTERS—THE ‘OBSERVATIONS’ ON ARISTOPHANES AND PLATO—
    THE ‘METRUM’—THE LYDGATE NOTES—SHENSTONE—PERCY—THE WARTONS—JOSEPH’S
    ‘ESSAY ON POPE’—THE ‘ADVENTURER’ ESSAYS—THOMAS WARTON ON SPENSER—HIS
    ‘HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY’—HURD: HIS COMMENTARY ON ADDISON—THE
    HORACE—THE DISSERTATIONS—OTHER WORKS—THE 'LETTERS ON CHIVALRY AND
    ROMANCE’—THEIR DOCTRINE—HIS REAL IMPORTANCE—ALLEGED IMPERFECTIONS OF
    THE GROUP—STUDIES IN PROSODY—JOHN MASON: HIS ‘POWER OF NUMBERS’ IN
    PROSE AND POETRY—MITFORD: HIS ‘HARMONY OF LANGUAGE’—IMPORTANCE OF
    PROSODIC INQUIRY—STERNE AND THE STOP-WATCH.


We have already, in the last volume, seen that in England, about the
middle of the eighteenth century, the tables of criticism turned, and
that a company of critics, not large, not as a rule very great men of
letters, began slowly, tentatively, with a great deal of rawness, and
blindness, and even backsliding, to grope for a catholic and free theory
of literature, and especially of poetry. We are now to examine this
group[96] more narrowly. With the not quite certainly to be allowed
exception of Gray, no one of them could pretend to the first rank in the
literature of the time; and most of them (Hurd and Percy were the chief
exceptions) did not live to see, even at the extreme verge of life, the
advent of the champions who were to carry their principles into
practice. But they were the harbingers of the dawn, little as in some
cases (perhaps in all) they comprehended the light that faintly and
fitfully illuminated them beforehand.

[Sidenote: _The first group._]

Three of the writers of this class whom it is necessary to name here
have been alluded to already; the others were Shenstone and the Wartons.
As so often happens in similar cases, it is exceedingly difficult to
assign exact priority, for mere dates of publication are always
misleading; and in this case, from their close juxtaposition, they
almost of themselves give the warning that they are not to be trusted.
How early, in his indolent industry at Cambridge, Gray had come to a
Pisgah-sight of the true course of English poetry; Shenstone, in
pottering and maundering at the Leasowes, to glimpses of the same; Percy
and Shenstone again to their design, afterwards executed by Percy alone,
of publishing the _Reliques_; the Wartons to their revolutionary views
of Pope on the one side and Spenser on the other; Hurd to his curious
mixture of true and false _aperçus_;—it is really impossible to say. The
last-named, judging all his work together, may seem the least likely,
early as some of that work is, to have struck out a distinctly original
way for himself; but all, no doubt, were really driven, _nolentes
volentes_, conscious or unconscious, by the Time-Spirit.

[Sidenote: _Mediæval reaction._]

The process which the Spirit employed for effecting this great change
was a simple one; indeed, we have almost summed up his inspiration in
the oracular admonition, _Antiquam exquirite matrem_. For more than two
hundred years literary criticism had been insolently or ignorantly
neglecting its mother, the Middle Age—now with a tacit assumption that
this period _ought_ to be neglected, now with an open and expressed
scorn of it. But, as usually happens, a return had begun to be made just
when the opposite progress seemed to have reached its highest point.
Dryden himself had “translated” and warmly praised Chaucer; Addison had
patronised _Chevy Chase_. But before the death of Pope much larger and
more audacious explorations had been attempted. In Scotland—whether
consciously stung or not by the disgrace of a century almost barren of
literature—Watson the printer[97] and Allan Ramsay[98] had, in 1706-11
and 1724-40, unearthed a good deal of old poetry. In England the
anonymous compiler[99] of the _Ballads_ of 1723 had done something, and
Oldys the antiquary, under the shelter of “Mrs Cooper’s” petticoat, had
done more with the _Muses’ Library_ of 1737. These examples[100] were
followed out, not without a little cheap contempt from those who would
be in the fashion, and knew not that this fashion had received warning.
But they _were_ followed, and their most remarkable result, in criticism
and creation combined, is the work of Gray.

[Sidenote: _Gray _]

We have not so very many fairer figures in our “fair” herd than Gray,
though the fairness may be somewhat like that of Crispa,[101] visible
chiefly to a lover of criticism itself. His actual critical performance
is, in proportion, scantier even than his poetical; and the scantiness
may at first sight seem even stranger, since a man can but poetise when
he can, but may, if he has the critical faculty, criticise almost when
he will and has the opportunity. That opportunity (again at first sight)
Gray may seem to have had, as scarcely another man in our whole long
history has had it. He had nothing else to do, and was not inclined to
do anything else. He had sufficient means, no professional avocations,
the knowledge, the circumstances, the _locale_, the wits, the taste,
even the velleity—everything but, in the full sense, the will. This
indeed he might, in all circumstances and at all times, have lacked, for
Mr Arnold showed himself no philosophic student of humanity when he said
that at the date of Milton, or at the date of Keats, Gray would have
been a different man. His _work_ would doubtless have been a different
work; but that is another matter. At all times, probably, Gray would
have had the same fastidiousness, the same liability to be “put off”;
and if his preliminary difficulties had been lightened by the provision,
in times nearer our own, of the necessary rough-hewing and first
research by others, yet this very provision would probably have
prevented him from pursuing what he would have disdainfully regarded as
a second-hand business. We may—we must—regret that he never finished
that _History of English Poetry_ which he hardly began, that he never
attempted the half-dozen other things of the kind, which he was better
equipped for doing than any man then living, and than all but three or
four men who have lived since. But the regret must be tempered by a
secret consciousness that on the whole he probably would _not_ have done
them, let time and chance and circumstance have favoured him never so
lavishly.

[Sidenote: _Peculiarity of his critical position._]

Yet this very idiosyncrasy of limitation and hamper in him made, in a
sense, for criticism; inasmuch as there are two kinds of critical
temperament, neither of which could be spared. There is the eager,
strenuous, almost headlong critical disposition of a Dryden, which races
like a conflagration[102] over all the field it can cover; and there is
the hesitating, ephectic, intermittent temperament of a Gray, which
directs an intense and all-dissolving, but ill-maintained heat at this
and that special part of the subject. In what is called, and sometimes
is, “originality,” this latter temperament is perhaps the more fertile
of the two, and Gray has it in an almost astounding measure. Great as
was his own reading, a man might, I think, be as well read as himself
without discovering any real indebtedness of his, except to a certain
general influence of literary study in many times and tongues. He knew
indeed, directly or indirectly, most of the other agents in the quiet
and gradual revolution which was coming on English poetic and literary
taste; but he was much in advance of all of them in time. Well as he was
read in Italian, he nowhere, I think, cites Gravina, in whom there was
something to put him on new tracks; and though he was at least equally
well read in French, and does cite Fontenelle, it is not for any of the
critical germs which we have discovered in that elusive oracle. The one
modern language to which he seems to have paid little or no attention
was German,[103] where the half-blind strugglings of the Zürich school
might have had some stimulus for him. Whatever he did, alone he did it;
and though the volume of his strictly critical observations (not
directed to mere common tutorial scholarship) would, if printed
consecutively, perhaps not fill twenty—certainly not fifty—pages of this
book, its virtue, intrinsic and suggestive, surpasses that of libraries
full of Rapins and even of Batteux.

[Sidenote: _The Letters._]

From the very first these observations have, to us, no uncertain sound.
In a letter to West,[104] when the writer was about six-and-twenty, we
find it stated with equal dogmatism, truth, and independence of
authority that “the language of the age is never the language of poetry
except among the French, whose verse, where the thought or image does
not support it, differs nothing from prose,” with a long and valuable
citation, illustrating this defence of “poetic diction,” and no doubt
thereby arousing the wrath of Wordsworth. Less developed, but equally
important and equally original, is the subsequent description of our
language as not being “a settled thing” like the French. Gray, indeed,
makes this with explicit reference only to the revival of archaisms,
which he defends; but, as we see from other places as well as by natural
deduction, it extends to reasonable neologisms also. In this respect
Gray is with all the best original writers, from Chaucer and Langland
downwards, but against a respectably mistaken body of critics who would
fain not merely introduce the caste system into English, but, like Sir
Boyle Roche, make it hereditary in this caste not to have any children.

This same letter contains some of Gray’s best-known criticisms, in his
faint praise of _Joseph Andrews_ and his warm appreciation of Marivaux
and Crébillon. I am not quite certain that, in this last, Gray intended
any uncomplimentary comparison, or that he meant anything more than a
defence of the novel generally—a defence which itself deserves whatever
crown is appropriated to critical merit, inasmuch as the novel had
succeeded to the place of Cinderella of Literature. However, both
Fielding and Smollett were probably too boisterous for Gray, who could
appreciate Sterne better, though he disliked “Tristram’s” faults.

But the fact is that it is not in criticisms of his contemporaries, or
indeed in definite critical appreciation at all, that Gray’s strength
lies. For any defects in the former he has, of course, the excuse that
his was a day of rather small things in poetry; but, once more, it is
not quite certain that circumstances would have much altered the case.
We must remember that Mr Arnold also does not come very well out of this
test; and indeed, that second variety of the critical temperament which
we have defined above is not conducive to enthusiasm.[105] It is, of
course, unlucky that Gray’s personal affection for Mason directed his
most elaborate praises to a tenth-rate object; but it is fair to
remember that he does reprehend in Mason faults—such as excessive
personification—which were not merely those of his friend, the husband
of “dead Maria,” but his own. It is a thousand pities that, thanks to
Mason himself, we have the similar criticisms of Beattie only in a
garbled condition; but they too are sound and sensible, if _very_
merciful. The mercy, however, which Gray showed perhaps too plentifully
to friends and relations he did not extend to others. That the “frozen
grace” of Akenside appealed little to him is less remarkable than his
famous pair of judgments on “Joe” Warton and Collins.

The coupling itself, moreover, and even the prophecy that “neither will
last,” are less extraordinary (for the very keenest eyes, when
unassisted by “the firm perspective of the past,” will err in this way,
and Joseph’s _Odes_ are, as his friend, Dr. Johnson, said of the rumps
and kidneys, “very pretty little things”) than the ascription of “a bad
ear” to Collins. This is certainly “a term inexplicable to the Muse.” It
was written in 1746. Five years later an undated but clearly datable
letter to Walpole contains (lxxxiv., ed. cit.) in a notice of Dodsley’s
_Miscellany_, quite a sheaf of criticisms. That of Tickell—“a poor
short-winded imitator of Addison, who had himself not above three or
four notes in poetry, sweet enough indeed, like those of a German flute,
but such as soon tire and satiate the ear with their frequent return”—is
very notable for this glance backward on the great Mr Addison, though it
would have been unjust to Tickell if (which does not quite appear) it
had been intended to include his fine elegy on Addison himself, and the
still finer one on Cadogan.[106] Gray is quite amiable to _The Spleen_
and _The Schoolmistress_, and _London_; justly assigns to Dyer (the Dyer
of _Grongar Hill_, not of _The Fleece_) “more of poetry in his
imagination than almost any of our number,” but unjustly calls him
“rough and injudicious,” and brushes most of the rest away, not too
superciliously. A year later (December 1752, to Wharton) he grants to
Hall’s Satires “fulness of spirit and poetry; as much of the first as Dr
Donne, and far more of the latter.” In the elaborate “buckwashing” of
Mason’s _Caractacus_ ode, which occupies great part of the very long
letter of December 19, 1756, there is a passage of great importance on
Epic and Lyric style, which exhibits as well perhaps as anything else
the independence, and at the same time the transitional consistency, of
Gray’s criticism.

He says first (which is true, and which no rigidly orthodox Neo-Classic
would or could have admitted): “The true lyric style, with all its
flights of fancy ornaments, heightening of expression, and harmony of
sound, is in its nature superior to every other style.” Then he says
that this is just the cause why it could not be borne in a work of great
length; then that the epic “therefore assumed graver colours,” and only
stuck on a diamond borrowed from her sister here and there; then that it
is “natural and delightful” to pass from the graver stuff to the
diamond, and then that to pass from lyric to epic is to drop from verse
to mere prose. All of which seems to argue a curious inequality in
clearing the mind from cant. It _is_ true, as has been said, that Lyric
is the highest style. But surely the reason why this height cannot be
kept is the weakness, not of human receptivity but of human
productiveness. Give us an _Iliad_ at the pitch of the best chorus of
the _Agamemnon_, and we will gladly see whether we can bear it or not.
Again, if you can pass from the dress to the diamond, why not pass from
the diamond to the dress? It is true that in Mason’s case the diamonds
were paste, and bad paste; but that does not affect the argument. When,
in still a later letter (clxii.) to the same “Skroddles”[107] he lays it
down that “extreme conciseness of expression, yet pure, perspicuous, and
musical is one of the grand beauties of lyric poetry,” we must
accentuate _one of the_. But there is a bombshell for Neo-Classicism in
cvii., still to “Skroddles.” “I insist that sense is nothing in poetry,
but according to the dress she wears and the scene she appears in.”

Gray’s attitude to _Ossian_ is interesting, but very much what we should
have expected. He was bribed by its difference from the styles of which
he was weary; but he seems from the very first to have had qualms (to
which he did some violence, without quite succeeding, in order to stifle
them) as to its genuineness.

[Sidenote: _The_ Observations _on Aristophanes and Plato_.]

No intelligent lover of the classics, whose love is not limited to them,
can fail to regret that by very far the larger bulk of Gray’s critical
_Observations_ is directed to Aristophanes and Plato. The annotator is
not incompetent, and the annotated are supremely worthy of his labours;
but the work was not specially in need of doing, and there have been
very large numbers of men as well or better qualified to do it. Such
things as this—_Aves_, 1114: “These were plates of brass with which they
shaded the heads of statues to guard them from the weather and the
birds”—are things which we do not want from a Gray at all. They are the
business of that harmless drudge, the lexicographer, in general, of a
competent fifth-form master editing the play, in particular. But there
was probably at that time not a single man in Europe equally qualified
by natural gifts and by study to deliver really critical and comparative
opinions on literature, to discuss the history and changes of English,
and the like. Nor has there probably at any date been any man better
qualified for this, having regard to the conditions of his own time and
country. One cannot, then, but feel it annoying that a life, not long
but by no means very short, and devoted exclusively to literary leisure,
should have resulted, as far as this special vocation of the author is
concerned, in some eighty small pages of Dissertation devoted to English
metres and to the Poems of Lydgate.

Let us, however, rather be thankful for what we have got, and examine
it, such as it is, with care.

[Sidenote: _The_ Metrum.]

In the very first words of the _Metrum_ it is curious and delightful to
see a man at this early period cutting right and left at the error of
the older editors, who calmly shoved in, or left out, words and
syllables to make what they thought correct versification for Chaucer,
and at the other error committed by the majority of philologists to-day
in holding that Chaucer’s syntax, accidence, and orthography were as
precise as those of a writer in the school of the French Academy. Even
more refreshing are, on the one hand, his knowledge and heed of
Puttenham, and, on the other, his correction of Puttenham’s doctrine of
the fixed Caesura, his admissions of this in the case of the
Alexandrine, and his quiet demonstration that the admission of it in the
decasyllable and octosyllable would make havoc of our best poetry. The
contrast of this reasonable method and just conclusion, not merely with
the ignorant or overbearing dogmatism of Bysshe half a century earlier,
but with the perversity, in the face of light and knowledge, of Guest a
century later, is as remarkable as anything in the history of English
criticism.

Gray, of course, was fallible. He entangles himself rather on the
subject of “Riding Rhyme”; and though he, first (I think) of all English
writers, notices the equivalenced dimeter iambics of Spenser’s _Oak and
Bryar_, and compares Milton’s octosyllables with them, he goes wrong by
saying that this is the _only_ English metre in which such a liberty of
choice is allowed, and more wrong still in bringing Donne’s well-known
ruggedness under this head. And he does not allow himself to do more
than glance at the Classical-metre craze, his remarks on which would
have been very interesting.

His subsequent analysis of “measures” with the chief books or poems in
which they are used is of very great interest, but as it is a mere table
it hardly lends itself to comment, though it fills nearly twenty pages.
The conclusion, however, is important, and, without undue guessing,
gives us fair warrant for inferring that Gray would have had much (and
not a favourable much) to say on the contemporary practice he describes
if the table had been expanded into a dissertation. And the table
itself, with its notes, shows that though his knowledge of Middle
English before Chaucer was necessarily limited, yet he knew and had
drawn right conclusions from Robert of Gloucester and Robert of Brunne,
_The Owl and the Nightingale_, the early English Life of St. Margaret,
and the _Poema Morale_.[108]

His observations on “the pseudo-Rhythmus” (which odd and misleading term
simply means Rhyme) present a learned and judicious summary of the facts
as then known with the shorter appendices on the same subject.

[Sidenote: _The Lydgate Notes._]

The observations on John Lydgate which close Gray’s critical _dossier_
might have been devoted to a more interesting subject, but they enable
us to see what the average quality of the _History_ would have been. And
they certainly go, in scheme and quality, very far beyond any previous
literary history of any country with which I am acquainted. The article
(as we may call it) is made up of a judicious mixture of biography,
account of books (in both cases, of course, as far as known to the
writer only), citation, exposition of points of interest in subject,
history, manners, &c., criticisms of poetical characteristics in the
individual, and now and then critical _excursus_ of a more general kind
suggested by the subject. In one place, indeed, Gray does introduce
Homer in justification of Lydgate: but no one will hesitate to do this
now and then; and it is quite clear that he does not do it from any
delusion as to a cut-and-dried pattern, or set of patterns, to which
every poem, new or old, was bound to conform.

And to this we have to add certain facts which, if not critical
utterances, speak as few such utterances have done—the novelty of Gray’s
original English poetry, and his selection of Welsh and Scandinavian
originals for translation and imitation. These things were themselves
unspoken criticism of the most important kind on the literary habits and
tastes of his country, and of Europe at large. The, to us, almost
unintelligible puzzlement of his contemporaries—the “hard as Greek” of
the excellent Garrick, and the bewilderment of the three lords at York
races, establish[109] the first point; as for the second, it establishes
itself. To these outlying languages and literatures nobody had paid any
attention whatever previously;[110] they were now not merely admitted to
literary attention, but actually allowed and invited to exercise the
most momentous influence on the costume, the manners, the standards of
those literatures which had previously alone enjoyed the citizenship of
Parnassus.

Small, therefore, as is the extent of deliberate critical work which
Gray has left us, we may perceive in it nearly all the notes of
reformed, revived, we might almost say reborn, criticism. The two
dominants of these have been already dwelt upon—to wit, the constant
appeal to history, and the readiness to take new matter, whether
actually new in time, or new in the sense of having been hitherto
neglected, on its own merits; not indeed with any neglect of the
ancients—for Gray was saturated with “classical” poetry in every
possible sense of the word, with Homer and Virgil, as with Dante and
Milton and Dryden—but purely from the acknowledgment at last of the
plain and obvious truth, “other times, other ways.” As a deduction from
these two we note, as hardly anywhere earlier, a willingness to take
literature as it is, and not to prescribe to it what it should be—in
short, a mixture of catholicity with tolerance, which simply does not
exist anywhere before. Lastly, we may note a special and very particular
attention to prosody. This is a matter of so much importance that we
must[111] ourselves bestow presently some special attention upon it, and
may advantageously note some other exercitations of the kind at the time
or shortly afterwards.

[Sidenote: _Shenstone._]

Of the rest of the group mentioned above, Shenstone[112] is the
earliest, the most isolated, and the least directly affected by the
mediæval influence. Yet he, too, must have felt it to have engaged, as
we know he did, with Percy in that enterprise of the _Reliques_ which
his early death cut him off from sharing fully. From his pretty
generally known poems no one need have inferred much tendency of the
kind in him: for his Spenserian imitation, _The Schoolmistress_, has as
much of burlesque as of discipleship in it. Nor are indications of the
kind extremely plentiful in his prose works. But the remarkable _Essays
on Men and Manners_, which give a much higher notion of Shenstone’s
power than his excursions into the rococo, whether versified or
hortulary, are full of the new germs. Even here, however, he is, after
the prevailing manner of his century, much more ethical than literary,
and shows deference, if not reverence, to not a few of its literary
idols. The mixed character of his remarks on Pope[113] (which are,
however, on the whole very just) may be set down by the Devil’s Advocate
to the kind of jealousy commonly entertained by the “younger generations
who are knocking at the door”; and his objection to the plan of Spenser
is neo-classically purblind. But his remarks on Prosody[114] breathe a
new spirit, which, a little later, we shall be able to trace in
development. His preference for rhymes that are “long” in pronunciation
over snip-snaps like “cat” and “not”; his discovery—herald of the great
Coleridgean reaction—that “there is a vast beauty in emphasising in the
eighth and ninth place a word that is virtually a dactyl”; the way in
which he lays stress on harmony of period and music of style as sources
of literary pleasure; and above all the fact, that when examining the
“dactylic” idea just given, he urges the absurdity of barring
trisyllabic feet in _any_ place, and declares that a person ignorant of
Latin can discern Virgil’s harmony, show us the new principles at work.
Perhaps his acutest critical passage is the maxim, “Every good poet
includes a critic: the reverse will not hold”; his most Romantic, “The
words ‘no more’ have a singular pathos, reminding us at once of past
pleasure and the future exclusion of it.”[115]

[Sidenote: _Percy._]

Shenstone’s colleague in the intended, his executor in the actual,
scheme of the _Reliques_ was allowed by Fate to go very much further in
the same path. At no time, perhaps, has Bishop Percy had quite fair
play. In his own day his friend Johnson laughed at him, and his enemy
Ritson attacked him with his usual savagery. In ours the publication at
last of his famous _Folio Manuscript_[116] has resulted in a good deal
of not exactly violent, but strong language as to his timorous and
eclectic use of the precious material he had obtained, and his scarcely
pardonable tamperings with such things as he did extract. Nobody indeed
less one-sided and fanatical than Ritson himself, or less prejudiced
than the great lexicographer, could ignore the vastness of the benefit
which the _Reliques_ actually conferred upon English literature, or the
enormous influence which it has directly and indirectly exercised; but
there has been a slight tendency to confine Percy’s merits to the
corners of this acknowledgment.

Yet there is much more, by no means always in the way of mere allowance,
to be said for Percy than this. His poetic taste was not perfect: it
could not be so. It was unlucky that he had a certain not wholly
contemptible faculty for producing as well as for relishing verse, and
an itch for exercising this; while he suffered, as everybody did till at
least the close of his own life, from failing entirely to comprehend the
late and rather decadent principle that you must let ruins alone—that
you must not “improve” your original. But a man must either be strangely
favoured by the gods, or else have a real genius for the matter, who
succeeds, at such a time and in such circumstances, in getting together
and publishing such a collection as the _Reliques_. Nor are Percy’s
dissertations destitute of critical as well as of instinctive merit.
Modern scholarship—which has the advantage rather of knowing more than
Percy could know than of making a better use of what it does know, and
which is much too apt to forget that the scholars of all ages are

                   “Priests that slay the slayer
                     And shall themselves be slain”—

can find, of course, plenty of errors and shortcomings in the essays on
the Minstrels and the Ancient Drama, the metre of _Piers Plowman_, and
the Romances; and they are all unnecessarily adulterated with theories
and fancies about origin, &c. But this last adulteration has scarcely
ceased to be a favourite

“form of competition” among critics; while I am bound to say that the
literary sense which is so active and pervading in Percy seems to have
deserted our modern philologists only too frequently.

At any rate, whatever may be his errors and whatever his shortcomings,
the enormous, the incalculable stimulus and reagency of the _Reliques_
is not now matter of dispute; while it is equally undeniable that the
poetical material supplied was reinforced by a method of historical and
critical inquiry which, again with all faults, could not fail to have
effects almost equally momentous on criticism if not quite so momentous
on creation.

[Sidenote: _The Wartons._]

The two Wartons and Hurd gave still more powerful assistance in this
latter department, while Thomas Warton at least supplied a great deal of
fresh actual material in his _History_. To none of the three has full
justice, as it seems to me, been recently done; while to one of them it
seems to me that there has been done very great injustice. The main
documents which we have to consider in the case of the two brothers are
for Joseph, his _Essay on Pope_ (1756-71), and the numerous critical
papers in _The Adventurer_; for Thomas, the _Observations on The Faerie
Queene_ (1754), and of course _The History of English Poetry_ (1774-81).

[Sidenote: _Joseph’s_ Essay on Pope.]

Warton’s _Essay on Pope_[117]—vaguely famous as a daring act of
iconoclasm, and really important as a document in the Romantic Revolt—
almost literally anticipates the jest of a hundred years later on
another document, about “chalking up ‘No Popery!’ and then running
away.” It also shows the uncertainty of stand-point which is quite
pardonable and indeed inevitable in these early reformers. To us it is
exceedingly unlucky that Warton should at page ii. of his Preface ask,
“What traces has Donne of pure poetry?” Yet when we come immediately
afterwards to the (for the time) bold and very nearly true statement
that Boileau is no more poetical than La Bruyère, we see that Warton was
thinking only of the satirist, not of the author of _The Anniversaries_
and the “Bracelet” poems.

Further, Warton lays down, _sans phrase_ and with no Addisonian
limitations, that “a poet must have imagination.” He is sure (_we_ may
feel a little more doubtful) that Young, his dedicatee, would not insist
on being called a poet on the strength of his own Satires. And he works
himself up to the position that in Pope there is nothing
_transcendently_ sublime or pathetic, supporting this by a very curious
and for its time instructive division of English poets into four
classes. The first contains poets of the first rank on the
sublime-pathetic-imaginative standard, and is limited to three—Spenser,
Shakespeare, and Milton. The second company—headed by Dryden, but
including, not a little to our surprise, Fenton—has less of this poetic
intensity, but some, and excels in rhetorical and didactic vigour. The
third is reserved for those—Butler, Swift, Donne, Dorset, &c.—who, with
little poetry, have abundant wit; and the fourth “gulfs” the mere
versifiers, among whom we grieve to find Sandys and even Fairfax herded
with Pitt and Broome.

There is evidently, both in its rightgoings and its short-comings,
considerable matter in this for discussion were such discussion in
place. But the main heads of it, which alone would be important, must be
obvious to every one. In the body of the _Essay_, Warton, as was hinted
above, rather “hedges.” He maintains his position that Pope was not
_transcendently_ a poet; and indulges in much detailed and sometimes
rather niggling criticism of his work; but readmits him after a fashion
to a sort of place in Parnassus, not quite “utmost, last, provincial,”
but, as far as we can make out, on the fence between Class Two and Class
Three. The book, as has also been said, is a real document, showing
drift, but also drifting. The Time-Spirit is carrying the man along, but
he is carried half-unconsciously.

[Sidenote: _The_ Adventurer _Essays_.]

Warton’s _Adventurer_ essays are specially interesting. They were
written early in 1753-54, some years before the critical period of
1760-65, and two or three before his _Pope_ essay; and they were
produced at the recommendation, if not under the direct editorship, of
Johnson. Further, in the peroratorical remarks which were usual with
these artificial periodicals, Warton explains that they were planned
with a definite intention not merely to reintroduce Criticism among
polite society, but to reinvest her with something more of exactness and
scholarship than had been usual since Addison followed the French
critics in talking politely about critical subjects. Warton’s own
exercitations are distinguished by a touch which may be best called
“gingerly.” He opens (No. 49) with a “Parallel between Ancient and
Modern Learning,” which is in effect an almost violent attack on French
critics, with exceptions for Fénelon, Le Bossu, and Brumoy. Then, taking
the hint of Longinus’s reference to “the legislator of the Jews,” he
feigns a fresh discovery of criticisms of the Bible by the author of the
Περὶ Ὕψους. He anticipates his examination of Pope by some remarks (No.
63) on that poet from the plagiarism-and-parallel-passage standpoint;
upholds the _Odyssey_ (Nos. 75, 80, 83) as of equal value with the
_Iliad_, and of perhaps greater for youthful students; insinuates some
objections to Milton (No. 101); studies _The Tempest_ (Nos. 93, 97) and
_Lear_ (Nos. 113, 116, 122) more or less elaborately.[118] Throughout he
appears to be conditioned not merely by the facts glanced at above, by
the ethical tendency of these periodicals generally, and by his own
profession of schoolmaster, but also by a general transition feeling, a
know-not-what-to-think-of-it. Yet his inclination is evidently towards
something new—perhaps he does _not_ quite know what—and away from
something old, which _we_ at least can perceive without much difficulty
to be the Neo-Classic creed. He would probably by no means abjure that
creed if it were presented to him as a test, but he would take it with
no small qualifications.

[Sidenote: _Thomas Warton on Spenser._]

For a combination of earliness, extension, and character no book noticed
in this chapter exceeds in interest Thomas Warton’s _Observations on
Spenser_.[119] To an ordinary reader, who has heard that Warton was one
of the great ushers of Romanticism in England, and that Spenser was one
of the greatest influences which these ushers applied, the opening of
the piece, and not a very few passages later, may seem curiously
half-hearted and unsympathetic. Such a reader, from another though
closely connected point of view, may be disappointed by the fragmentary
and _annotatory_ character of the book, its deficiency in _vues
d’ensemble_, its apologies, and compromises, and hesitations. But those
who have taken a little trouble to inform themselves on the matter,
either by their own inquiries or by following the course which has been
indicated in this book, will be much better satisfied. They will see
that he says what he ought to have said in the concatenation
accordingly.

It is impossible to decide how much of yet not discarded orthodoxy, and
how much of characteristic eighteenth-century compromise there is in the
opening about “depths of Gothic ignorance and barbarity,” “ridiculous
and incoherent excursions,” “old _Provençal_ vein,” and the like.
Probably there is a good deal of both;[120] there is certainly a good
deal which requires both to excuse it. Yet before long Warton fastens a
sudden petard on the main gate of the Neo-Classic stronghold by saying:
“But it is absurd to think of judging either Ariosto or Spenser by
precepts which they did not attend to.” Absurd, indeed! But what becomes
of those antecedent laws of poetry, those rules of the kind and so
forth, which for more than two hundred years had been accumulating
authority? It is no good for him to go on: “We who live in the days of
writing by rule.... Critical taste is universally diffused ...” and so
on. The petard goes on fizzing and sparkling at the gate, and will blow
it in before long.

In the scattered annotations, which follow for a long time, the attitude
of compromise is fairly kept; and even Neo-Classics, as we have seen,
need not necessarily have objected to Warton’s demonstration[121]
_pièces en main_, that Scaliger “had no notion of simple and genuine
beauty”; while the whole of his section (iv.) on Spenser’s stanza, &c.,
is full of _lèse-poésie_, and that (vii.) on Spenser’s inaccuracies is
not much better. But the very next section is an important attack on the
plagiarism-and-parallel-passage mania which almost invariably develops
itself in bad critics; and the defence of his author’s Allegory (§ x.),
nay, the plump avowal of him as a Romantic poet, more than atones for
some backslidings even here. Above all, the whole book is distinguished
by a genuine if not always understanding _love_ of the subject;
secondly, by an obvious refusal—sometimes vocal, always latent—to accept
_a priori_ rules of criticism; thirdly, and most valuably of all, by
recurrence to contemporary and preceding models as criteria instead of
to the ancients alone. Much of the last part of the book is occupied
with a sort of first draft in little of the author’s subsequent
_History_; he is obviously full of knowledge (if sometimes flawed) and
of study (if sometimes misdirected) of early English literature. And
this is what was wanted. “Nullum numen abest si sit _conscientia_”
(putting the verse aside) might almost be the critic’s sole motto if it
were not that he certainly cannot do without _Prudentia_ itself. But
Prudentia without her sister is almost useless: she can at best give
inklings, and murmur, “If you are not conscious of what has actually
been done in literature you can never decide what ought and ought not to
have been done.”

[Sidenote: _His_ History of English Poetry.]

This is what gives the immense, the almost unequalled importance which
Warton’s _History of English Poetry_[122] should possess in the eyes of
persons who can judge just judgment. It has errors: there is no division
of literature in which it is so unreasonable to expect accuracy as in
history, and no division of history to which that good-natured
Aristotelian dictum applies so strongly as to literary history. Its
method is most certainly defective, and one of its greatest defects is
the disproportion in the treatment of authors and subjects. When the
author expatiates into Dissertation, he may often be justly accused of
first getting out of his depth as regards the subject, and then
recovering himself by making the treatment shallow.[123] And I do not
know that his individual criticisms betray any very frequent or very
extraordinary acuteness of appreciation. To say of the lovely

                 “_Lenten is come with love to town_,”

that it “displays glimmerings of imagination, and exhibits some faint
ideas of poetical expression,” is surely to be, as Dryden said of Smith
and Johnson in _The Rehearsal_, a “cool and insignificant gentleman”;
and though it is quite accurate to recognise “much humour and spirit” in
_Piers Plowman_, it is a little inadequate and banal.

But this is mere hole-picking at worst, at best the necessary or
desirable ballast or set-off to a generous appreciation of Warton’s
achievement. If his erudition is not unflawed, its bulk and mass are
astonishing in a man of his time; if his method and proportion are
defective, this is almost inevitable in the work of a pioneer; and we
have seen enough since of critics and historians who make all their
geese swans, not to be too hard on one who sometimes talked of peacocks
or humming-birds as if they were barndoor fowls or sparrows. The good
which the book, with its wealth of quotation as well as of summary, must
have done, is something difficult to realise but almost impossible to
exaggerate. Now at least, for England and for English, the missing links
were supplied, the hidden origins revealed, the Forbidden Country thrown
open to exploration. It is worth while (though in no unkind spirit) once
more to recall Addison’s _péché de jeunesse_ in his _Account of the
English Poets_, in order to contrast it with the picture presented by
Warton. Instead of a millennium of illiteracy and barbarism, with
nothing in it worth noticing at all but Chaucer and Spenser—presented,
the one as a vulgar and obsolete merryandrew, and the other as half
old-wives’-fabulist and half droning preacher—century after century,
from at least the thirteenth onward (Warton does not profess to handle
Anglo-Saxon)’ was presented in regular literary development, with
abundant examples of complicated literary kinds, and a crowded bead-roll
of poets, with specimens of their works. Men had before them—for the
first time, except in cases of quite extraordinary leisure,
opportunities, taste, and energy—the _actual_ progress of English
prosody and English poetic diction, to set against the orthodox doctrine
that one fine day not so very early in the seventeenth century Mr Waller
achieved a sort of minor miracle of creation in respect of both. And all
these works and persons were accorded serious literary and critical
treatment, such as had been hitherto reserved for the classics of old,
for the masterpieces of what Callières calls _les trois nations polies_
abroad, and for English writers _since_ Mr Waller. That Warton did not
gush about them was no fault; it was exactly what could have been
desired. What was wanted was the entrance of mediæval and Renaissance
poetry into full recognition; the making of it _Hoffähig_; the
reconstitution of literary history so as to place the work of the Middle
Period on a level basis, and in a continuous series, with work ancient
and modern. And this Warton, to the immortal glory of himself, his
University, and his Chair,[124] effected.

[Sidenote: _Hurd. His Commentary on Addison._]

The remaining member of the group requires handling with some care. Not
much notice has been taken of Bishop Hurd for a long time past, and some
authorities who have given him notice have been far from kind. Their
unkindness, I think, comes very near injustice; but Hurd has himself to
blame for a good deal of it. As a man he seems to have been, if fairly
respectable, not in the least attractive; an early but complete
incarnation of the disposition called “donnishness”; a toady in his
earlier manhood, and an exacter of toadying in his later. He lived long
enough to endanger even his critical fair fame; by representing his
admiration for Shakespeare as an aberration, and declaring that he
returned to his first love Addison.[125] And his work upon Addison
himself (by which, I suppose, he is most commonly known) is of a
meticulous and peddling kind for the most part, by no means likely to
conciliate the majority of recent critics. Most of Hurd’s notes deal
with mere grammar; and while nearly all of them forget that writers like
Addison make grammar and are not made by it, some are choice examples of
the sheer senseless arbitrariness which makes grammar itself too often a
mere Lordship of Misrule and Abbacy of Unreason.[126] Yet even here
there are good things; especially some attempts[127]—very early and till
recently with very few companions in English—to bring out and analyse
the rhythmical quality of prose. But it may be frankly admitted that if
the long-lived Bishop[128] had been a critic only in his Addisonian
commentary, he would hardly have deserved a reference, and would
certainly have deserved no long reference, here.

[Sidenote: _The Horace._]

His own _Works_[129] are of much higher importance. The edition (with
commentary, notes, and dissertations) of Horace’s _Epistles to the Pisos
and to Augustus_ is in part of the class of work to which in this stage
of our history we can devote but slight attention, but even that part
shows scholarship, acuteness, and—what is for our purpose almost more
important than either—wide and comparative acquaintance with critical
authorities, from Aristotle and Longinus to Fontenelle and Hume.[130]

[Sidenote: _The Dissertations._]

The “Critical Dissertations” which follow mark a higher flight, indeed,
as their titles may premonish, they rather dare that critical inane to
which we have more than once referred. Hurd is here a classicist with
tell-tale excursions and divagations. In his _Idea of Universal Poetry_
he will not at first include verse in his definition, nor will he accept
the commonplace but irresistibly cogent argument of universal practice
and expectation. Poetry is the only form of composition which has
pleasure for its end; verse gives pleasure; therefore poetry must use
verse. The fiction or imitation is the soul of poetry; but style is its
body (not “dress,” mark). Hurd even takes the odd and not maintainable
but rather original view that the new prose fiction is a clumsy thing,
foolishly sacrificing its proper aids of verse.[131] He is most
neo-classically peremptory as to the laws of Kinds, which are _not_
arbitrary things by any means, nor “to be varied at pleasure.”[132] But
the long Second Dissertation _On the Provinces of the Drama_, which
avowedly starts from this principle shows, before long, something more
than those easements and compromises by which, as was said in the last
volume, eighteenth-century critics often temper the straitness of their
orthodoxy. “It is true,” says Hurd,[133] “the laws of the drama, as
formed by Aristotle out of the Greek poets, can of themselves be no rule
to us in this matter, because these poets had given no examples of such
intermediate species.” It is, indeed, most true; but it will be a little
difficult to reconcile it with the prohibition of multiplying and
varying Kinds. The Third and Fourth Dissertations, filling a volume to
themselves, deal with _Poetical Imitation_ and its _Marks_, the
hard-worked word “imitation” being used in its secondary or less
honourable sense.

The Discourses are, in short, of the “parallel passage” kind, but
written in a liberal spirit,[134] showing not merely wide reading but
real acuteness, and possessing, in the second instance, the additional
interest of being addressed to “Skroddles” Mason, who certainly
“imitated” in this sense pretty freely. Even here that _differentia_
which saves Hurd appears, as where he says,[135] “The golden times of
the English poetry were undoubtedly the reigns of our two queens,”
while, as we saw in the last volume,[136] Blair was teaching, and for
years was to teach,

his students at Edinburgh, a scheme of literary golden ages in which
that of Elizabeth was simply left out.

Still, these three volumes, though they would put Hurd much higher than
the Addison Commentary, are not those which give him the position sought
to be vindicated for him here.

[Sidenote: _Other Works._]

Neither will his titles be sought by any one in his _Lectures on the
Prophecies_: while even that edition of Cowley’s _Selected Works_ the
principle of which Johnson[137] at one time attacked, while at another
he admitted it to more favour, can only be drawn on as a proof that Hurd
was superior to mere “correctness” in harking back to this poet. Nay,
the _Moral and Political Dialogues_ (which drew from the same
redoubtable judge[138] the remark, “I fear he is a Whig still in his
heart”), though very well written and interesting in their probable
effect on Lander, are not in the main literary. Literary characters—
Waller, Cowley, and others—often figure in them, but only the third, “On
the Age of Queen Elizabeth,” has something of a literary bent, and this
itself would scarcely be noteworthy but for its practically independent
appendix, the _Letters on Chivalry and Romance_. Here—not exactly in a
nutshell, but in less than one hundred and fifty small pages—lie all
Hurd’s “proofs,” his claims, his titles: and they seem, to me at least,
to be very considerable. It is true that even here we must make some
deductions. [Sidenote: _The_ Letters on Chivalry and Romance.] The
passages about Chivalry and about the Crusades not merely suffer from
necessarily insufficient information, but are exposed to the diabolical
arrows of that great _advocatus diaboli_ Johnson when he said[139] that
Hurd was “one of a set of men who account for everything systematically.
For instance, it has been a fashion to wear scarlet breeches; these men
would tell you that according to causes and effects no other wear could
at the time have been chosen.” This is a most destructive shrapnel to
the whole eighteenth century, and by no means to the eighteenth century
only; but it is fair to remember that Hurd’s Romance was almost as
distasteful to Johnson as his Whiggery. And now there is no need for any
further application of the refiner’s fire and the fuller’s soap; while
on the other hand what remains of the _Letters_ (and it is much) is of
altogether astonishing quality. I know nothing like it outside England,
even in Germany, at its own time; I know nothing like it in England for
more than thirty years after its date; I should be puzzled to pick out
anything superior to the best of it (with the proper time allowance)
since.

[Sidenote: _Their doctrine._]

At the very opening of the _Letters_, Hurd meets the current chatter
about “monkish barbarism,” “old wives’ tales,” and the rest, full tilt.
“The greatest geniuses,” he says, “of our own and foreign countries,
such as Ariosto and Tasso in Italy, and Spenser and Milton in England,
were seduced by these barbarities of their forefathers; were even
charmed by the Gothic Romances. _Was this caprice and absurdity in them?
Or may there not be something in the Gothic Romance peculiarly suited to
the views of a genius, and to the ends of poetry? And may not the
philosophic moderns have gone too far in their perpetual contempt and
ridicule of it?_” There is no mistake possible about this; and if the
author afterwards digresses not a little in his “Chivalry” discussions—
if he even falls into the Addisonian track, which he elsewhere condemns,
of comparing classical and romantic methods, as a kind of apology for
the latter, one ought, perhaps, to admit that it was desirable, perhaps
necessary, in his day to do so. But when he returns to his real subject,
the uncompromisingness and the originality of his views are equally
evident, and they gain not a little by being compared with Warton, whose
_Observations on the Faërie Queene_ had already appeared. After arguing,
not without much truth, that both Shakespeare and Milton are greater
when they “use Gothic manners” than when they employ classical, he
comes[140] to Spenser himself, and undertakes to “criticise the _Faërie
Queene_ under the idea not of a classical, but of a Gothic composition.”
He shows that he knows what he is about by subjoining that, “if you
judge Gothic architecture by Grecian rules, you find nothing but
deformity, but when you examine it by its own the result is quite
different.” A few pages later[141] he lays the axe even more directly to
the root of the tree. “The objection to Spenser’s method arises from
your classic ideas of Unity, which have no place here.” There is unity
in the _Faërie Queene_, but it is the unity not of action, but of
design.[142] Hurd even reprobates the additional unities which Spenser
communicates by the ubiquity of Prince Arthur, and by his allegory. (He
may be thought wrong here, but this does not matter.) Then he proceeds
to compare Spenser with Tasso, who tries to introduce classic unity, and
gives the Englishman much the higher place; and then again he unmasks
the whole of his batteries on the French critics. He points out, most
cleverly, that they, after using Tasso to depreciate Ariosto, turned on
Tasso himself; and, having dealt dexterous slaps in the face to
Davenant, Rymer, and Shaftesbury, he has a very happy passage[143] on
Boileau’s _clinquant du Tasse_, and the way in which everybody, even
Addison, dutifully proceeded to think that Tasso was _clinquant_, and
nothing else. Next he takes the offensive-defensive for “the golden
dreams of Ariosto, the celestial visions of Tasso” themselves, champions
“the fairy way,” and convicts Voltaire out of the mouth of Addison, to
whom he had appealed. And then, warming as he goes on, he pours his
broadsides into the very _galère capitaine_ of the pirate fleet, the
maxim “of following Nature.” “The source of bad criticism, as
universally of bad philosophy, is the abuse of terms.”[144] A poet, no
doubt, must follow “Nature”; but it is the nature of the poetical world,
not of that of science and experience. Further, there is not only
confusion general, but confusion particular. You must follow the
ordinary nature in satire, in epigram, in didactics, _not_ in other
kinds. _Incredulus odi_ has been absurdly misunderstood.[145] The
“divine dream”[146] is among the noblest of the poet’s prerogatives.
“The _Henriade_,” for want of it, “will in a short time be no more read
than _Gondibert_.”[147] And he winds up a very intelligent account of
Chaucer’s satire on Romance in _Sir Thopas_ by a still more intelligent
argument, that it was only the abuse of Romance that Chaucer satirised,
and by an at least plausible criticism of the advent of Good Sense,

              “Stooping with disenchanted wings to earth.”

“What,” he concludes, “we have gotten is, you will say, a great deal of
good sense; what we have lost is a world of fine fabling, the illusion
of which is so grateful to the charmed spirit that, in spite of
philosophy and fashion, ‘Fairy’ Spenser still ranks highest among the
poets; I mean, with all those who are either come of that house, or have
any kindness for it.”

And now I should like to ask whether it is just or fair to say that the
work of the man who wrote this thirty-three years before _Lyrical
Ballads_ is “vapid and perverted,” that it is “empirical, dull, and
preposterous,” and, at the best, “not very useful as criticism”?

[Sidenote: _His real importance._]

On the contrary, I should say that it was not only useful as criticism,
but that it was at the moment, and for the men, the _unum necessarium_
therein. Why the Time-Spirit chose Hurd[148] for his mouthpiece in this
instance I know no more than those who have used this harsh language of
him; this Spirit, like others, has a singular fashion of blowing where
he lists. But, at any rate, he does not blow hot and cold here. Scraps
and orts of Hurd’s doctrine may of course be found earlier—in Dryden, in
Fontenelle, in Addison, even in Pope; but, though somebody else may know
an original for the whole or the bulk of it, I, at least, do not. The
three propositions—that Goths and Greeks are to be judged by their own
laws and not by each other’s; that there are several unities, and that
“unity of _Action_” is not the only one that affects and justifies even
the fable; and that “follow Nature” is meaningless if not limited, and
pestilent heresy as limited by the prevailing criticism of the day—these
three abide. They may be more necessary and sovereign at one time than
at another, but in themselves they are for all time, and they were for
Hurd’s more than for almost any other of which Time itself leaves
record.

[Sidenote: _Alleged imperfections of the group._]

Literary currishness and literary cubbishness (an ignoble but hardy and
vivacious pair of brethren) have not failed almost from the first to
growl and gambol over the mistakes which—in most cases save that of
Gray—were made by these pioneers. Some of these mistakes they might no
doubt have avoided, as he did, by the exercise of a more scholarly care.
But it may be doubted whether even Gray was not saved to a great extent
from committing himself by the timidity which restrained him from
launching out into extensive hypotheses, and the indolence or
bashfulness which held him back from extensive publication, or even
writing. It was indeed impossible that any man, without almost
superhuman energy and industry, and without a quite extraordinary share
of learning, means, health, leisure, and long life, should have at that
time informed himself with any thoroughness of the contents and
chronological disposition of mediæval literature. The documents were, to
all but an infinitesimal extent, unpublished; in very few cases had even
the slightest critical editing been bestowed on those that were in
print; and the others lay in places far distant, and accessible with the
utmost difficulty, from each other; for the most part catalogued very
insufficiently, or not at all, and necessitating a huge expense of time
and personal labour even to ascertain their existence. At the beginning
of the twentieth century any one who in these islands cannot find what
he wants in a published form could in forty-eight hours obtain from the
librarians at the British Museum, the Bodleian, the Cambridge Library,
that of Trinity College, Dublin, and that of the Faculty of Advocates in
Edinburgh, information on the point whether what he wants is at any of
them, and by exerting himself a little beyond the ordinary could visit
all the five in less than a week. When the British Museum was first
opened, in the middle of the last century, and Gray went to read in it
“through the jaws of a whale,” it would have taken a week or so to
communicate with the librarians; they would probably have had to make
tedious researches before they could, if they chose to do so, reply, and
when the replies were received, the inquirer would have had to spend the
best part of a month or more in exhausting, costly, and not always safe
journeys, before he could have got at the books.

There was, therefore, much direct excuse for the incompleteness and
inaccuracy of the facts given by Percy, and Warton, and even Hurd; and
not a little indirect excuse for the wildness and baselessness of their
conjectures on such points as the Origin of Romance and the like. It is
scarcely more than thirty or forty years—it is certainly not more than
fifty or sixty—since it began to be possible for the student to acquaint
himself with the texts, and inexcusable for the teacher not to do so. It
is a very much shorter time than the shortest of these since theories,
equally baseless and wild with those of these three, have been
confidently and even arrogantly put forward about the origin of the
Arthurian legends, and since mere linguistic crotchets have been allowed
to interfere with the proper historical survey of European literature.
The point of importance, the point of value, was that Percy, and Warton,
and Hurd, not only to the huge impatience of Johnson, the common friend
of the first two, devoted their attention to ballad, and romance, and
saga, and mediæval treatise—not only recognised and allowed the
principle that in dealing with new literary forms we must use new
literary measures—not only in practice, if not in explicit theory,
accepted the pleasure of the reader, and the idiosyncrasy of the book,
and the “leaden rule” which adapts itself to Art and not Art to itself,
as the grounds of criticism, but laid the foundations of that wider
study of literary history which is not so much indispensable to literary
criticism as it is literary criticism itself.

[Sidenote: _Studies in Prosody._]

To this remarkable group of general precursors may be added, for a
reason previously given, a couple of pioneers in a particular branch—one
contemporary with and indeed in most cases anticipating their general
work; the other coming level with its latest instances. It is for the
author of the missing _History of English Prosody_—which the present
writer would have attempted long ago if his time and studies had been at
his own disposal, and which he may yet adventure if the night and the
shadows permit—to account for if he can, to set forth and analyse as he
may, the curious and unique coincidences of metrical with general
criticism in England. The fact of them is not contestable, and, as we
have seen already, the tyranny of the absolutely syllabic,
middle-paused, end-stopped couplet coincides exactly with the
“prose-and-sense” dynasty in English poetry. We have seen also that most
of the precursors, explicitly or incidentally, by theory or by practice,
attacked or evaded this tyranny. But not one of them—though Gray’s
_Metrum_ shows what he might have done if in this matter, as in others,
he could only have persuaded himself to “speak out”—had the inclination
or the courage to tackle the whole subject of the nature and laws of
harmony in English composition. The two whom we have mentioned were
bolder, and we must give them as much space as is allowable without
unduly invading the province of that other _History_.

[Sidenote: _John Mason: his_ Power of Numbers _in Prose and Poetry_.]

In 1749 appeared two pamphlets, on _The Power of Numbers and the
Principles of Harmony in Poetic Compositions_, and on _The Power and
Harmony of Prosaic Numbers_. No author’s name is on either title-page,
but they are known to be by a Dissenting minister named John[149] Mason.
He seems to have given much attention to the study and teaching of
elocution, and he published another pamphlet on that special subject,
which attained its fourth edition in 1757.[150]

In his poetical tractate Mason plunges into the subject after a very
promising fashion, by posing the question with which he has to deal as
“What is the cause and source of that pleasure which, in reading either
poetry or prose, we derive not only from the sound and sense of the
words, but the order in which they are disposed?” or, as an alternative,
“Why a sentence conveying just the same thought, and containing the very
same words, should afford the ear a greater pleasure when expressed one
way than another, though the difference may perhaps arise only from the
transposition of a single word?” One feels, after reading only so far,
that De Quincey’s well-known phrase, “This is what you can recommend to
a friend!” is applicable—that whether the man gives the right answers or
not he has fixed at once on the right questions, and has acknowledged
the right ground of argument. Not “How ought sentences to be arranged?”
not “How did A. B. C. arrange them or bid them be arranged?” but “How
and why do they give the greatest _pleasure_ as the result of
arrangement?”

So also, in his prose tractate, Mason starts from the position that
“numerous” arrangement adds wonderfully to the _pleasure_ of the reader.
To enter into the details of his working out of the principle in the two
respects would be to commit that “digression to another kind” from which
we have warned ourselves off. But it is not improper to say that, a
hundred and fifty years ago, he had already cleared his mind of all the
cant and confusion which to this day beset too many minds in regard to
the question of Accent _v._ Quantity, by adopting the sufficient and
final principle[151] that “that which _principally fixes and determines_
the quantities in English numbers is the accent and emphasis”; that
though he is not quite so sharply happy in his definition, he evidently
uses “quantity” itself merely as an equivalent for “unit of metrical
value”; that he clears away all the hideous and ruinous nonsense about
“elision,” observing[152] that in

               “And many an amorous, many a humorous lay”

there are fourteen syllables instead of ten, and that “the ear finds
nothing in it redundant, defective, or disagreeable, but is sensible of
a sweetness not ordinarily found in the common iambic verse.” Further,
he had anticipated[153] Hurd by giving elaborate examples of quantified
analysis of prose rhythm. The minutiæ of all this, interesting as they
are, are not for us; the point is that here is a man who has not the
fear of Bysshe before his eyes, or the fear of anybody; who will not be
“connoisseured out of his senses,” and whose brain, when his ear tells
it that a line is beautiful, proceeds calmly to analyse if possible the
cause of the beauty, without troubling itself to ask whether anybody has
said that it ought not to exist.[154]

[Sidenote: _Mitford—his_ Harmony of Language.]

These inquiries into prosody and rhythm formed no unimportant part of
the English criticism of the mid-eighteenth century.[155] The two
different ways in which they were regarded by contemporaries may be
easily guessed, but we have documentary evidence of them in an
interesting passage of the dedication to John Gilpin[156] of the second
edition of the book in which they culminated, and to which we now come.
Mitford’s _Inquiry into the Principles of Harmony in Language_
represents himself as having paid a visit to Pye, afterwards Laureate;
and, finding him with books of the kind before him, as having
expostulated with “a votary of fancy and the Muses” for his “patience
with such dull and uninteresting controversy.” Pye, it seems, replied
that “interest in the subject so warmly and extensively taken by English
men of letters” had excited his curiosity, which had been gratified by
Foster’s elucidation of the subject itself. And Mitford, borrowing the
book, soon found his own excited too.[157]

The volume of which this was the genesis, appeared first in 1774.[158]
The second edition, very carefully revised and extended, was not
published till 1804. It may appear at first sight unfortunate, but on
reflection will probably be seen to have been a distinct advantage, that
even this second edition preceded the appearance of any of the capital
works of the new school except the _Lyrical Ballads_. For had it been
otherwise, and had Mitford taken any notice of the new poetry, we should
in all probability have had either the kind of reactionary protest which
often comes from pioneers who have been overtaken and passed, or at best
an attempt at awkward adjustment of two very different points of view.
As it is, the book, besides exhibiting much original talent, belongs to
a distinct school and platform—that of the later but still
eighteenth-century Romantic beginners, while at the same time it
represents a much greater knowledge of old literature, helped by Ellis’s
_Specimens_, by Ritson’s work, and other products of the last years of
the century, than had been possible to Shenstone, to Gray, or even to
Warton.

Once more, its detailed tenets and pronouncements, with all but the
general methods by which they are arrived at, belong to another story.
But these general methods, and some special exemplifications of them,
belong to us. Rightly or wrongly, Mitford sought his explanations of the
articulate music of poetry from the laws of inarticulate music itself.
For this reason, or for another, he was disposed to join the accentual
and not the quantitative school of prosodists, and to express strong
disapproval of the adoption of classical prosodic terms in regard to
English. He is sometimes arbitrary, as when he lays down[159] “that in
English every word has one syllable always made eminent by accent”; and
we have to remember that he was writing after nearly a hundred years of
couplet verse on Bysshian principles before we can excuse—while we can
never endorse—his statement[160] that “to all who have any familiarity
with English poetry a _regularity_ in the disposition of accents is its
most striking characteristic.” He is rather unsound on the Pause, but
lays down the all-important rule that “rhyme is a time-beater” without
hesitation. He admits trisyllabic feet even in what he calls “common
time”; but (in consequence of his accentual theories probably) troubles
himself with “aberration” of accent (_i.e._, substitution of trochee for
iamb), with redundant or extra-metrical syllables in the middle of the
line, and with other epicyclic and cumbrous superfluities. But the most
important thing in the whole book—the thing which alone makes it really
important to _us_—is that he supports his theories by a regular
examination of the whole of English verse as far as he knows it, even
back to Anglo-Saxon times, and that in making the examination, he
appeals not to this supposed rule or to that accepted principle, but to
the _actual_ practice of the _actual_ poets as interpreted to him by his
own ear.

In his errors, therefore (or in what may seem to some his errors), as
well as in his felicities, Mitford exhibits himself to the full as an
adherent of that changed school of poetical criticism which in the first
place strives to master the actual documents, in the second to
ascertain, as far as possible and as closely as possible, their
chronological relation to each other, and in the third to take them as
they are and explain them as well as it may, without any selection of a
particular form of a particular metre at a particular time as a norm
which had been painfully reached and must on no account be departed
from. He shows the same leaning by his constant reference to the ear,
not the rule, as the authority. The first draft of his book was
published not only when Johnson was still alive, but long before the
_Lives of the Poets_ appeared; and it is most interesting to see the
different sides from which they attack the prosodic character, say of
Milton. Johnson—it is quite evident from his earlier and more
appreciative handling of the subject in the _Rambler_—approaching Milton
with the orthodox decasyllabic rules in hand, found lines which most
undoubtedly do not accord with those rules, and termed them harsh
accordingly. Mitford approaches the lines with nothing but a listening
ear, finds them “not harsh and crabbed, but musical as Apollo’s lute,”
and then proceeds to construct, rightly or wrongly, such a rule as will
allow and register their music.

[Sidenote: _Importance of prosodic inquiry._]

The truth is, that these inquirers both builded and pulled down better
than they knew. Many persons besides Mitford have begun by thinking
controversies about prosody dull and uninteresting, while only too few
have allowed themselves to be converted as he did; nor is it common to
the present day to find a really intelligent comprehension of the
importance of the subject. On the contrary, a kind of petulant
indignation is apt to be excited by any criticism of poetry which
pursues these “mechanical” lines, as they are called, and the critic has
sometimes even to endure the last indignity of being styled a
“philologist” for his pains.

Yet nothing is more certain than that these inquiries into prosody were
among the chief agencies in the revolution which came over English
poetry at the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the
next. A sort of superstition of the decasyllable, hardened into a
fanaticism of fixed pause, rigidly disyllabic feet and the rest, had
grown upon our verse-writers. A large part of the infinite metrical
wealth of English was hidden away and locked up under taboo. Inquiries
into prosody broke this taboo inevitably; and something much more than
mere metrical wealth was sure to be found, and was found, in the
treasure-houses thus thrown open.

[Sidenote: _Sterne and the stop-watch._]

One expected figure of a different kind may perhaps have been hitherto
missed in this part of our gallery. Sterne’s well-known outburst as to
criticism, in the twelfth chapter of the third book of _Tristram
Shandy_, is far too famous a thing to be passed over with the mere
allusion given to it in the last volume, or with another in this. Nay,
it may be said at once, from its fame and from its forcible expression,
to have had, and even in a sense still to have, no small place among the
Dissolvents of Judgment by Rule. “Looking only at the stop-watch” is one
of those admirable and consummate _phrases_ which settle themselves once
for all in the human memory, and not merely possess—as precisians
complain, illegitimately—the force of an argument, but have a property
of self-preservation and recurrence at the proper moment in which
arguments proper are too often sadly lacking.

Further, it must be admitted that there are few better instances of the
combined sprightliness and ingenuity of Sterne’s humour. “Befetiched
with the bobs and trinkets of criticism” is in reality even happier than
the “stop-watch,” and of an extraordinary propriety. Though he did
“fetch it from the coast of Guinea,” nothing was ever less far-fetched
or more home-driven. The “nothing of the colouring of Titian” is equally
happy in its rebuke of the singular _negativeness_—the attention to what
is _not_ there, not to what is—of Neo-Classicism; while the outburst,
again world-known, as to the “tormenting cant of criticism,” and the
ingenious and thoroughly English application of this cant itself to the
eulogy of the curse of Ernulphus, are all too delightful, and have been
too effective for good, not to deserve the heartiest acknowledgment.

At the same time the Devil’s Advocate—who is always a critic, if a
critic is not always an officer of the devil—-may, nay must, point out
that Sterne’s main object in the passage is not strictly literary. It is
assuredly from the sentimental point of view that he attacks the
Neo-Classic “fetichism”; the “generous heart” is to “give up the reins
of its imagination into the author’s hands,” to “be pleased he knows not
why, and cares not wherefore.” To which Criticism, not merely of the
Neo-Classic persuasion, can only cry, “Softly! Before the most generous
of hearts gives up the reins of imagination (which, by the way, are not
entirely under the heart’s control) to an author, he must show that he
can manage them, he must _take_ them, in short. And it is by no means
superfluous—it is highly desirable, if not absolutely necessary—to know
and care for the wherefore of your pleasing.” Nor, wide as was Sterne’s
reading, and ingenious as are the uses which he makes of it, does it
appear that he had any very great interest in literature as such—as
being _good_, and not merely odd, or naughty, or out-of-the-way, or
conducive to outpourings of heart. He might even, by a very ungenerous
person, be described as by no means disinterested in his protests. For
certainly his own style of writing had very little chance of being
adjudged to keep time according to the classical stop-watch, of
satisfying, with its angles and its dimensions, the requirements of the
classical scale. So he is rather a “Hal o’ the Wynd” in the War of
Critical Independence—he fights for his own hand, though he does
yeoman’s service to the general cause.




                              CHAPTER IV.

                   DIDEROT AND THE FRENCH TRANSITION.

THE POSITION OF DIDEROT—DIFFICULT TO AUTHENTICATE—BUT HARDLY TO BE
    EXAGGERATED. HIS IMPRESSIONISM—THE RICHARDSON ÉLOGE—THE ‘REFLECTIONS
    ON TERENCE’—THE REVIEW OF THE ‘LETTRES D’AMABED’—THE EXAMINATION OF
    SENECA—THE QUALITY AND EMINENCE OF HIS CRITICAL POSITION— ROUSSEAU
    REVISITED—MADAME DE STAEL— HER CRITICAL POSITION—AND WORK— THE
    ‘LETTRES SUR ROUSSEAU’—THE ‘ESSAI SUR LES FICTIONS’— THE ‘DE LA
    LITTÉRATURE’—THE ‘DE L’ALLEMAGNE’— HER CRITICAL ACHIEVEMENT:
    IMPUTED—AND ACTUAL— CHATEAUBRIAND: HIS DIFFICULTIES—HIS CRITICISM—
    INDIRECT—AND DIRECT—THE ‘GÉNIE DU CHRISTIANISME’— ITS SATURATION
    WITH LITERARY CRITICISM—SURVEY AND EXAMPLES— SINGLE POINTS OF
    EXCELLENCE—AND GENERAL IMPORTANCE— JOUBERT: HIS REPUTATION—HIS
    LITERARY αὐτάρκεια— THE LAW OF POETRY—MORE ON THAT SUJECT— ON STYLE—
    MISCELLANEOUS CRITICISMS— HIS INDIVIDUAL JUDGMENTS MORE DUBIOUS— THE
    REASON FOR THIS—ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS— GENERAL REMARKS—THE OTHER
    ‘EMPIRE CRITICS’— FONTANES—GEOFFROY—DUSSAULT—HOFFMAN, GARAT, ETC.—
    GINGUENÉ—M.J. CHÉNIER—LEMERCIER—FELETZ— COUSIN—VILLEMAIN—HIS CLAIMS—
    DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE FROM THEM—BEYLE— RACINE ET SHAKESPEARE—HIS
    ATTITUDE HERE— AND ELSEWHERE—NODIER.


[Sidenote: _The position of Diderot._]

One of those judgments of the Common Sense which, while sometimes
finding it necessary to contest or correct them, we have also found in
the main not untrustworthy, has long ago decided that for good or for
ill, the weakening of the neo-classic tradition in its great stronghold,
France, is due originally to Denis Diderot more than to any one else—
nay, that the Germans themselves owe him a heavy quit-rent. With this
decision we shall have no quarrel here; on the contrary, a long
familiarity with the writings[161] of this voluminous and disorderly
genius, has made the present writer one of its very strongest
supporters. There is not the slightest need to engage either in
controversy or in compromise with others, or to hark back upon our own
demonstrations that in Fontenelle, in La Motte, and elsewhere, there are
seeds and germs of a critical calculus very different from Boileau’s. We
may at this stage take these things for granted. Far be it from us to
say that “there’s nothing new or true, and it doesn’t matter.” But we
may very modestly, but very unflinchingly say that there is nothing
wholly new or old; that there are at least very few things wholly true
or false; and that it matters very much that it should be so.

[Sidenote: _Difficult to authenticate._]

Therefore, or however (for either link of the argument would be
defensible) it is reasonable or convenient to start this chapter with
Diderot. Yet he can hardly have, in mere space, a treatment
proportionate—as proportion has been in other cases observed—to his
importance. It is an importance rather of attitude and suggestion than
of explicit pronouncement; and the explicit pronouncements are so many,
and so various, that to summarise and discuss them would require far
more than the utmost room that we have given to our very greatest
authorities. Moreover, that inadequate universality, that flawed
all-round-ness, which every competent critic has noticed in Diderot,
would make wildernesses of proviso and commentary necessary. It is not
quite safe to leave unread a single page of the twenty big octavos of
his works, in arriving at an independent estimate of his critical, as of
his general quality: and those who do not care to undertake so
considerable an investigation, must take the word of those who have
undertaken it, to some extent on trust. Further, though Diderot is by no
means a mere general aesthetician—though his very critical value
consists largely in the fact that he flies upon the corporal work of art
like a vulture—yet his utterances in different arts concern and
condition one another after a fashion, of which, before his time, there
was hardly any example. We cannot possibly here bestow space on the
_Paradoxe sur le Comédien_ and the vast and tempting assemblage of the
_Salons_. Yet the person who attempts to examine Diderot’s purely
literary pronouncements without examining these, will do so at his peril
certainly, and almost certainly to his damage. _Le Neveu de Rameau_ is
imperative: nay, the much-abused _Jacques le Fataliste_ itself must not
be neglected.[162]

[Sidenote: _But hardly to be exaggerated. His Impressionism._]

Diderot is the first considerable critic—it would hardly be too much to
say the first critic—known to history who submits himself to any, to
every work of art which attracts his attention, as if he were a
“sensitised” plate, animated, conscious, possessing powers of
development and variation, but absolutely faithful to the impression
produced. To say that he has no theories may seem to those who know him
a little, but only a little, the very reverse of the truth: for from
some points of view he is certainly a _machine à théories_ as much as
Piron was a _machine à saillies_. But then the theory is never a theory
_precedent_; it never (or so seldom as to require no correction of these
general statements) governs, still less originates, his impression; it
follows the impression itself and is based thereon. Not seldom the
substructure, if not even the foundation, of the impression itself may
seem to us quite disproportionate to the originating work of art—be it
book, or play, or picture; but that is not the point. Constantly, the
enthusiasm which had made Diderot give himself up to the fascination of
his new subject may seem to lead him into all sorts of extravagances.
The best known and perhaps the best example of these extravagances, the
almost famous _éloge_ of Richardson, has been drawn

upon by nearly everybody who has written on Diderot, and by most who
have written on Richardson, for examples.

[Sidenote: _The Richardson éloge._]

This marvellous dithyramb[163] really exceeds, in the superlatives of
its commendation of a work of originality and genius, the most “azure
feats” of a modern reviewer on a tenth-rate novelist or minor poet.
Richardson puts in action all the maxims of all the moralists: and yet
all these maxims would not enable one to write a single page of him.
Diderot was constantly going to cry out [He _does_ constantly cry out “O
Richardson!”] “Don’t believe him! Don’t go there!” to the characters,
and especially to Clarissa. This author sows in the mind whole crops of
virtues, which are sure to come up sooner or later. He knows _every_
kind of life, and scrutinises its secrets infallibly. He preaches
resignation, sympathy, justice. He has made Diderot so melancholy that
his friends ask him tenderly “What is the matter?” But Diderot would not
be cured for anything. To think that there should be pedantic,
frivolous, insensible wretches who reproach Richardson with being
long-winded! He must be read in the original. He should be discussed in
society. Richardson is a new gospel: he will always be popular, though
thoroughly appreciated only by the elect. He is truer than history; his
intense interest hides his art; a friend of Diderot, who had only read
the French translation, omitting the burial and will of Clarissa, wept,
sobbed, abused the Harlowe family, walked up and down without knowing
what he was doing, on perusing the original. Richardson simply haunts
Diderot, stifles his genius, delays him from work and effort. Ye Ages!
begone and hasten the full harvest of the honours due to Richardson!

Very extravagant, no doubt; rather absurd, if anybody likes. But fair
and softly; let us, as usual, examine the nature and the circumstances
of this extravagant, this absurd, critical fact.

In the first place, we have to remember that it _was_ a work of genius—
whatever its faults—that was brought under Diderot’s notice; in the
second, that as at least a majority, if not a consensus, of competent
critics has long ago decided, it was an example or collection of
examples of genius applied in a new way—that without going to the
pedantic extremes to which some have gone in their definition of the
novel, it has been found impossible to discover before Richardson the
necessary mixture of incident and character-interest, the unity (not
necessarily a dramatic or even an epic unity) of plot, the mingled
appeal to, and play upon, passions and manners. Then let us ask
ourselves whether the systems of criticism and the critics, with which
and with whom we are up to this point familiar, have as a rule proved
themselves equal to cope with new geniuses and new kinds of composition—
whether their tendency has not rather been distinctly to frown upon such
things; at any rate, to give them the coldest and most distrustful
welcome. Let us remember that Hurd, about the same time as Diderot,[164]
and in the very act of defending the older and more poetical romance,
was throwing cold water on prose fiction as a clumsy upstart. And
finally, let us ask ourselves whether all Diderot’s exaggerations are
not, after all, exaggerations of the truth—owing their weak points to an
excitable nature and a prevalent fashion of expression, their strong
ones to a genius, and a perception of truth itself, not unfairly
comparable in their way to Richardson’s own in his.

[Sidenote: _The_ Reflections on Terence.]

Side by side in the Works with this effusion there are some _Reflections
on Terence_[165] written within a year of the other. In the famous Roman
dramatist there is neither novelty, nor intense sentiment, nor
multiplicity of individual character, nor volume of story. He was the
darling of those critics from whom Diderot differed most. His faults—at
least his shortcomings—are obvious to infinitely less acute, restless,
and rapid judgments than that of the great Encyclopædist. His
excellences are of the kind which might seem least likely to appeal to
Diderot. Yet Diderot is not merely just to him, not merely bountiful,
but not in the least clumsy or haphazard in his bounty. He will not have
the time-honoured (or _dis_honoured) putting off of the praise of
Terence on Scipio and Lælius. Admitting his “lack of verve,” he gives
him full credit for its compensation of even humanity, for his
“statuesque” and quiet perfection. He adds remarks on translation which
are excellent; and if he may have taken the idea of holding up Terence
_and_ Molière together for admiration from La Bruyère,[166] he escapes
La Bruyère’s mistake of suggesting the _mixture_ of the immiscible.

[Sidenote: _The Review of the_ Lettres d’Amabed.]

Take a third example of a very different kind. We have a short
review[167] by Diderot (first extracted by M. Assézat from MS.) of
Voltaire’s _Lettres d’Amabed_. This book, it is hardly necessary to say,
is anti-religious: and Diderot was violently anti-religious himself. It
is saturated with Voltaire’s sniggering indecency: and Diderot was the
author of _Les Bijoux Indiscrets_.[168] Lastly, it was by Voltaire, of
whom Diderot, though an independent, was an eager and faithful champion.
But it is “without taste, without _finesse_, without invention; a
botching up of stale blackguardisms about Moses and Christ and the rest;
it has no interest, no fire, no verisimilitude, but plenty of dirt and
of clumsy fun.” This is the plain critical truth about the _Letters of
Amabed_, and it is Diderot who says it in so many words, and says it
moreover in MS.—which could curry no favour with, and obtain none from,
public hypocrisy and cant.

[Sidenote: _The Examination of Seneca_.]

Turn the examining instrument from these short pieces to the long
critical examination of Seneca,[169] which forms the second part of the
_Essai sur les Règnes de Claude et de Néron_. It is open to any one to
agree or disagree with Diderot’s uncompromising, though by no means
indiscriminate, championship of the usurious philosopher-statesman; as a
matter of fact, though it is a matter of only argumentative importance,
I am, except on the head of style, one of those who disagree with it.
But agree or disagree as he may with the conclusion, no competent
critic, I should suppose, can fail to admire the thoroughness with which
Diderot has taken in and digested his complicated literary subject, the
range and extent of literary knowledge with which he illustrates it, the
readiness of his argumentation and exposition, and, above all, the
craftsmanlike and attractive fashion in which he combines analysis and
criticism. Again, I doubt whether there is an earlier example of what we
may call “freehand” criticism—the criticism which is not tethered to the
necessity of applying or expounding rules in reference to its subject,
but can take that subject in, can deal with it on its own plan and
specification—can, in fact, _appreciate_, without being bound to refer
to and obey some official book of prices. There are some two hundred
pages of this appreciation, and one’s only reason (itself rather
uncritical) for qualified satisfaction with it is that it does not
handle some writer of greater intrinsic value and wider artistic appeal.

[Sidenote: _The quality and eminence of his critical position._]

I should be prepared to multiply the citation and discussion of the
critical “places” in Diderot to almost any extent, if such
multiplication were reconcilable with my plan; but, as has been said, to
do so would be as superfluous logically as it is methodically
impossible.[170] Diderot’s commanding position, in criticism as well as
in aesthetics, is due not more to the number and variety of his
individual utterances than to the fact that he certainly obtrudes, and
in all probability conceals, no general æsthetic “preventions” (as the
French would say, and as Dryden very wisely does say) whatsoever. One of
the great resources and one of the great charms of his criticism is the
way in which he draws it from, and returns it to, all the arts without
letting any of them interfere with the other. The pedants of
art-criticism have of course said that his is too literary; but the
pedant is always pedantic, and always negligible, whether he draws his
principles from French classrooms in the seventeenth century or from
French studios in the nineteenth and twentieth. No matter whether he is
talking of writing or of acting, of painting or of sculpture, the work
of art is for Diderot something which ought to give the human sense and
the human soul pleasure, which, if it does so, is to be welcomed and
extolled, not without (if anybody feels thereto disposed) inquiry into
the manner and the causes, rather mediate and immediate than ultimate,
of that pleasure. He can everywhere display a really encyclopædic
“curiosity,” in the good sense. He can be extremely inventive and
subtle, as in the famous _Paradoxe_;[171] he can enter into infinite
detail and yet never lose grasp of principle, as in the essay _De la
Poésie Dramatique_;[172] he can glance and digress in lightning fashion
as he does everywhere, but especially in the _Salons_. As good an
instance of this as any is the admirable excursus on Mannerism in the
_Salon_ of 1767,[173] which is applicable to literature quite as much as
to painting.

Certainly, if any devout Arnoldian says that Diderot’s greatness is due
to his “fertility in ideas,” no contradiction will be thought of here.
But then we have the old difficulty as to what “ideas” mean. I do not
remember that Mr Arnold himself makes much reference to our Denis; and,
indeed, Diderot must have been, from some points of view, nearly as
horrible—let us lay cards on table and say as incomprehensible—to him as
to his friend M. Scherer. But it may be that the critical “idea” is
neither more nor less than the result of that contact of subject and
critic which has been glanced at before—a contact intimate, physical,
uninterrupted, and resulting in conception and birth. This, if anything,
is the “idea” of modern criticism; and while few have been more prolific
of such results than Diderot, none before him and hardly any since have
so invariably and consciously guided themselves by its law. I do not
know that he has ever positively stated this law; I really do not know
that it ever has been explicitly laid down by any of the constituted, or
even the non-constituted, critical authorities. But his whole work is an
exemplification of it.

And the result is, that this whole work, wherever it approaches
criticism, is alive; and that he cannot help its becoming alive, even if
he has apparently given hostages to Death by attempting set
dissertations on cut-and-dried subjects, or by dallying with science, or
atheism, or what not. It is a further reason why even such
contemporaries as Lessing, and later, Goethe, found in him such an
extraordinary stimulus. The dead, mechanical deductions of too many
critics under the older system could produce nothing but copies, even
more dead and more mechanical than themselves, though, as we have seen
in many a figure of our gallery, the principle of life in human nature
made the greater critics of the older dispensation sometimes quicken
under it. But Diderot’s fecundity was contagious: his “cultures” have
propagated themselves from generation to generation directly, have set
the example of a similar creation of critical entities to fit subjects
ever since. From a formula you will never get anything but formulas:
from the living contact of critic and subject you will get live
criticism.

[Sidenote: _Rousseau revisited._]

I was so severely rebuked by an excellent and friendly critic for
dismissing Rousseau, with but a reference, from the last volume, that I
thought it my duty to reconsider the matter, though the principal plea
of the rebuker, that M. Texte had devoted some hundred pages to
Jean-Jacques, appeared to me _nihil ad rem_. But I might have committed
an error as to the _res_ itself, and so I took down the four quartos,
and went through them to see if my memory had played me false, as that
faculty sometimes does when one is walking in the browner shades. I need
not have alarmed myself; but it is perhaps worth while to spare a page
to put the _pièces_ actually before the reader. _There is in Rousseau
practically no literary criticism at all from the first line of the
“Confessions” to the last of the “Correspondence.”_[174] No writer known
to me abstains with such an inevitable and tell-tale deflection from
“judging of authors.” His attitude is that of his favourite Plutarch
heightened to a Jean-Jacquian intensity. It is always of the moral,
never of the literary, character and effect of a book that he is
thinking. His fervid sensibility to the fascination of women, of
scenery, of mere food and wine (for he admits this), does not seem to
have extended to literature at all. By an extremely humorous coincidence
(I do not know whether any one has noticed it before me, but probably
some one has) he writes from Venice—the very place where he had just
received, or was just to receive, the withering advice, “_Zanetto!
studia la matematica!_”—to order books from Paris; and they are nearly
all mathematics. The famous _Discours_ about arts and sciences blinks
the literary point of view altogether. The famous Letter to D’Alembert
on Plays would almost adjust itself to plays in dumb show, except that
spoken words have an additional moral or immoral effect. When
Saint-Preux writes to Julie about her studies, he never so much as
glances at the literary value of books: nor is this touched in all the
talk about Education in _Emile_. The everlasting moral has dinned the
Muses out. So it is in the two only less famous letters to Voltaire; so
everywhere. I replace my four quartos, having found just one really
critical sentence, in allocation and application only, for Jean-Jacques,
probably, was not thinking of literature at all. But when he asked
himself, “Serais-je damné?” and replied, “Selon mes Jansénistes la chose
était indubitable, mais selon ma conscience il me paraissait que non,”
he does _mutatis mutandis_ suggest the revolt of the Romantic conscience
against the Neoclassic.

“Ah, but,” they say, “Rousseau’s influence on the mind of Europe counted
for so much in its changes of critical and creative taste.” _A la bonne
heure!_ and I have recognised this, and shall recognise it in the proper
places. But the agencies that bring about changes of critical and
creative taste, proper to be mentioned, are not also as proper to be
worked out here. Of such influences the capture of Constantinople is a
famous and undoubted one. Was I bound to tell the story of Byzantine
decadence, and the story of Mussulman progress? It has in innumerable
instances, if not universally, influenced a man’s criticism, a man’s
creation—whether he is in love at the time; whether he has arrived at
that right and happy point, which Mr Thackeray would not call “a _pint_”
in the drinking of good wine; whether he has been under the soothing
influence of the Indian weed. Am I therefore bound to insert in this
History a treatise on “Feminine Attraction,” a book on “The Wines of the
World,” and an “Anti-Counterblast” to King James? In all seriousness, it
may, I think, be requested once more of readers and of critics that they
will “look at the bill of fare.” If the meat and the wine suit them,
well and good; if not, are there not, in this particular instance, M.
Texte and his hundred pages to make _quaere aliud diversorium_ no merely
churlish or vindictive dismissal? While, as to such remarks as _are_
proper to be made here on the general critical temper and tendency of
the Romantic movement, they were deliberately postponed in the last
volume, and will find their proper place, not here, but in the
Interchapters of the present.

This indirect influence of Rousseau, with the direct influence of
Diderot, no doubt cast a mighty leaven into the mind of France during
the later decades of the eighteenth century; and it is noteworthy that,
of the three remarkable writers with whom we shall next deal, while
Madame de Staël directly and Chateaubriand indirectly express the first,
Joubert was much in contact with Diderot during his youth. But the
dominant criticism of the last twenty or five-and-twenty years of the
century remained neo-classic; and we have accordingly dealt with it[175]
in the last volume. Nay, the dominant criticism of the first twenty or
so of the next abode in no very different state. Here we shall deal with
what has not yet been handled of this half century, or nearly so, in
France, isolating more or less the three great figures above mentioned,
and dealing more in group with these “Empire Critics,” who in different
ways reflect the transition to Romanticism.

[Sidenote: _Madame de Staël._]

Of the interest, the influence, the significance, and, in so far as
these important things go, the importance, of the work of Madame de
Staël[176] in criticism, there can, as to their mere existence, be no
two well-formed opinions. I wish that I could think this statement—made
frankly in intention, and with deliberate consideration of the weight of
every word—likely to obtain for the examination which follows the credit
of impartiality which I think it deserves. Unfortunately, we are now
approaching closely matters which are distinctly _cinis dolosus_. At
every step the apparently irreconcilable difference between those who
mean by criticism the judging and judicial enjoyment of literature, and
those who mean by it theorising about the ultimate causes of such
judgment and such enjoyment, is likely—is sure—to interfere. Nor does it
seem possible for the philosophers to agree to keep these points of law
for the appropriate tribunal, and to let the rest of the case be stated
on its own merits.[177]

[Sidenote: _Her critical position._]

Now “Corinne” is about the first person in whose case this difficulty
and this difference become acute and annoying. She is not quite so
popular with the critics of “ideas” as she used to be; they have,
belike, discovered at last her rather awkward sciolism of fact; her very
theories are not theirs; the “hideous hum” of “Madame de Staël : ideas;
Chateaubriand : images,” ceases to tire the weary ear quite to the same
extent as it used to do in histories of literature and critical
discussions thereof. But historically she is not to be denied; there is
no doubt that no one has ever done the popularising of “metacritic”
throughout Europe as she did.

[Sidenote: _And work._]

But if the painful historian were only left to his own hod-and-trowel
work instead of having to draw the sword and don the helmet against
metacritical raiders, his task would not be a difficult one. Madame de
Staël, unlike her countryman and in some sort master, Rousseau, _is_ a
critic, not merely indirectly, conjecturally, and by dint of the “must
have,” but frankly, plainly, in honest straightforward deliverances _ad
hoc_. The documents of her criticism are mainly four: the early
_Letters_ on Rousseau himself, the later but still early _Essay on
Fiction_, the famous _De La Littérature_, and the more famous _De
l’Allemagne_. In all, but in increasing measure as they come, we see the
curious and interesting development and production of a temperament
originally no doubt possessing some masculine gifts of thought, as well
as many feminine ones of feeling, excited and almost irritated to the
highest activity by the word-fencing of the _philosophe_ salons, and
presented with all the current doctrines or fancies in regard to
literature and its precincts, by contact with the most active minds of
Geneva, Paris, and Germany. With her half-masculine vigour and her
wholly feminine receptivity, she absorbs and reproduces, _tant bien que
mal_, all or a large part of the ideas which had been fermenting in all
countries more or less, but especially in Germany, for the great part of
a century,—French-Godwinian perfectibility, the æsthetic of Lessing and
Winckelmann, the historical theories of Herder, as much as she could of
the applied criticism of Goethe and Schiller and the Schlegels. Her
different works show her of course at different stages of this
influence. They show also—with equal necessity and undisguised by a
system of explanatory and supplementary notes in the later editions—what
actual knowledge of literature she had, what stock of material to expose
and submit to all this complicated apparatus, all this varied range of
reagency.

[Sidenote: _The_ Lettres sur Rousseau.]

The very early work on Rousseau is of course the most immature, and it
meddles the least with purely literary criticism, but it is, for reasons
obvious _à priori_, not the least interesting, and it is perhaps not the
least satisfactory on acquaintance. The contrast between the modest (but
not fairly to be called mock-modest) brevity of the original Preface,
and the pomp and cant and claptrap of the second, twenty-six years
later, may raise a sigh in amiable breasts. But the text, whether one
agree or disagree with its sentiments and estimates, by no means lacks
merit. The writer is well acquainted with the actual matter of
discussion (which was by no means always the case with her later): she
is in intelligent as well as emotional sympathy with it. She does not
indeed take the purely literary side very strongly; she had her master’s
own practice as warrant for not doing so. But her remarks (some of which
are perhaps innocently borrowed from Longinus) on Rousseau’s style, and
the inapplicability of the word “perfection” to it are not despicable:
and the characterisations of the various works, though always tending to
the moral and material side, are very far from negligible. It may be
worth noting that while objecting, not without reason, to “les
plaisanteries de Claire,”[178] she does not seem to know that they are
only a corrupt following of Richardson. But the whole is a very fair
_début_ in criticism, inclined as we should expect to the moral side,
but not illegitimately so.

[Sidenote: _The_ Essai sur les Fictions.]

The _Essai sur les Fictions_, a sort of after-thought introduction to
the three little stories, _Mirza_, _Adelaide et Théodore_, and
_Pauline_, is a slight and rather curious defence of the novel of actual
life moralised, as the most useful of fictitious or imitative writings,
by means of a survey of such writings under three heads: “Marvellous and
allegorical fictions,” “historical fictions,” and “natural fictions,”
_i.e._ novels proper, where nothing is true, but everything _true-like_.
The first two are very insufficiently treated, and her condemnation of
the historical novel is deprived of all weight by the fact that she
wrote too early to know any really good example of it. Perhaps the same
may be said of the third.

[Sidenote: _The_ De La Littérature.]

The _Rousseau_, however, is but the work of a novice, and the _Sur Les
Fictions_ is still something of an essay-piece: yet in both one may
observe a _nisus_ towards large generalising, which was the natural
result of the author’s time, temperament, and education. This _nisus_
turns into a full spread of wing in _De La Littérature_, published as
the centuries met, and when the author was four and thirty. Its avowed
central principle is a transformed “Modernism,”—the application of the
favourite _philosophe_ doctrine of perfectibility to literature, with an
inflexible determination that though Greek literature may be better than
anything before it, Roman shall be better than Greek, and (though there
is _hiatus valde lacrimabilis_ about mediæval), that modern literature
shall be greater than either. To those who are not pure “ideologists,”
and who do not think that an ounce of generalisation, however silly,
however demonstrably false, is better than a ton of sober consideration
and array of fact, this theory condemns itself at once. Here, at any
rate, we may legitimately echo Mr Burchell and his “Fudge!” Yet
Corinne’s attempts to prove it are interesting, and would be more so, if
she had had skill enough to hide her ignorance of the facts themselves,
or knowledge enough of them to gild her paradox. Her actual method is
not merely characteristic of time and person, but has a certain
ingenuity: indeed, it no doubt deceived herself. She will not take
literature _per se_, but she takes it in its relations with “virtue,”
“glory,” “liberty,” “happiness,” first in the abstract, and then under
these categories as illustrated by Greek, Roman, “Northern,” “Southern,”
and individual national literatures, paying special attention to
English, and defending it from the objections of French
eighteenth-century critics. It is, of course, easy to see how, by
showing, or trying to show, that virtue, &c., is, _according to her_,
better displayed in literature as it goes on, she proves, or attempts to
prove, her general point.

Unfortunately, in the course of the argument, the most enormous errors
of fact, the most startling assertions, which cannot take the benefit of
_de gustibus_, simply pullulate. The book nearly drops from one’s hands
when one reads “Eschyle ne présente aucun résultat moral”: and the
reference to the _Prometheus_ by which this statement is supported,
suggests very forcibly that the writer knew nothing else, and did not
understand this. More allowance must be made, no doubt, for the point of
view, when we read further that “les héros (of Greek tragedy) n’avaient
pas cette grandeur soutenue que leur a donnée Racine”; but what a point
of view it is![179] We are in full topsyturvydom with the statement[180]
that “la philosophie des Grecs me paraît fort au-dessous de celle de
leurs imitateurs les Romains,” and we do not get out of the country as
long as the contrast of Greek and Roman continues. But here, it may be
said, we are in the region of opinion. The plea cannot be urged for the
astounding statements which diversify the defence of our own barbarous
poetry. In believing _Ossian_ genuine, as in admiration for it, she, of
course, had respectable companions: but the person who could say[181]
“les poètes Anglais qui _ont succédés aux bardes écossais_ ont ajouté à
leurs tableaux,” &c., could have possessed neither the faintest
knowledge of literary, or even political, history, nor the least
extensive acquaintance with actual examples. The note,[182] “le docteur
Blair n’aurait pu juger en Angleterre Shakespere avec l’impartialité
d’un étranger,” betrays the most obvious and complete ignorance of what
_le docteur Blair_ had actually said. The description in the text[183]
of Falstaff as a _charge_, a “caricature populaire,” a “plaisanterie
grossière,” speaks the lady’s critical competence with a voice of doom.
But the most utterly damning page is that[184] which denies inventive
imagination to English poetry; airily dismisses Waller and Cowley as
unsuccessful imitators of the Italians; adds _je pourrais y joindre
Downe_ (sic), _Chaucer_, &c.; and a moment later despatches at a blow,
as showing this want of inventive imagination, _The Rape of the Lock_
(full of faults of taste), _The Faërie Queene_ (the most tiresome thing
in the world), _Hudibras_ (witty, but dwelling too long on its jokes).
Admit (it is a good deal to admit) that there may be faults of taste in
the _Rape_; admit that more than one Englishman has been unfortunate
enough to find Spenser tedious; admit that there is even some justice in
the charge against _Hudibras_. How (except by the easy method of having
never read them) can you leash these three books together? and, most of
all, by what prank of her own elves does “that Elfish Queen” find
herself between Trulla and Belinda? I have myself not the slightest
doubt that though Madame de Staël may have glanced at the _Rape_, and
disliked the sylph machinery, she had never so much as opened “Downe” or
Chaucer, Butler or Spenser, and I should not be surprised if she knew
nothing, save at second-hand, of Waller or Cowley.

I could multiply examples _ad lib._, from the German chapters
especially, but the “matter of Germany” had better be dealt with under
the book exclusively devoted to it. As for general strictures on the
_Littérature_, they also will best be postponed till the _De
l’Allemagne_ has been dealt with.

[Sidenote: _The_ De l’Allemagne.]

That this book is, as far as criticism goes, her masterpiece, there can
be no doubt, and it would be surprising if it were not so. She was
older; she had read more; and she had enjoyed very distinguished
“coaching.” This kept her fairly straight in matters of fact within the
comparatively limited range which she here allowed herself as far as
literature is concerned. German literature had taken itself by this time
pretty seriously for a couple of generations: and the German men of
letters whom she interrogated or “led about,” were perfectly competent
and apparently not unwilling[185] to keep her from such absurdities as
we have just been noticing. Very much of the book is plain,
straightforward _compte rendu_, and generally _très bien rendu_,
whatever minor faults one may find here and there. Above all, the
expressed and very fairly carried out purpose of comparative study which
made Napoleon so angry, and with such good reason,[186] gives the book
an honourable place as a precursor, if not, indeed, an absolute origin,
in a new way which had to be trodden. If Napoleon’s innate and colossal
vulgarity had not been constantly tripping up his immense cleverness, he
might have perceived that here was a new feather of some consequence to
stick in his sham crown-imperial. The analyses and _précis_ of such
short things as _Lenore_ and the _Braut von Korinth_ are rather
excessive for a book: but neither piece is easily translatable into
French, and Madame de Staël probably knew very well that few of her dear
quasi-countrymen were likely to learn German, in order to read them.

The old leaven of French and _philosophe_ taste and culture shows itself
at intervals interestingly. She cites[187] (a little generously perhaps
in any case) the line in Raynouard’s _Les Templiers_, when the reprieve
arrives too late to save the knights who have been chanting hymns on the
pyre

        “Mais il n'était plus temps; les chants avaient cessés,”

in connection with the yoke of the unities. But, strangely enough, she
does not seem to notice the weakening and watering down of what she
calls _l’un des mots les plus sublimes qu’on puisse entendre au
théâtre_, by its being made part of the speech of a messenger. The
voices of the warrior-priests ceasing one by one in agony, and the
reprieve coming on the silence of the last, would be, though a rather
_melo_-dramatic, a really dramatic moment. The recital of the situation
is a little less ordinary than talk “of the rain and the fine time,” and
that is all.

This, however, is succeeded by some really acute, and in French quite
novel, criticism of Shakespeare as too subtle, too impartial, &c., for
the stage—criticism which she had probably learnt from Schlegel,—and the
whole chapter[188] is important; as is that on “Comedy,” though the
definition[189] from Schlegel himself, with which it starts, is very
nearly _galimatias_.

There is much good sense in the criticism of German romance, though the
old leaven once more appears in the statement that “verse is required
for the marvellous; prose will not do.”[190] Always on Goethe she is
good, and, “philosophess” as she is, she has some very sensible remarks
on the over-dose of metaphysic in Schiller’s criticism. On most of her
subjects, indeed, from Wieland to Jean Paul, she is still worth reading.

[Sidenote: _Her critical achievement—Imputed._]

Her admirers, however,—or the partisans of the school of criticism,
which, as has been said, she did so much to “vulgarise”—would no doubt
regard this matter as merely, in Luther’s famous epithet of contempt,
“stramineous.” It is on her attempt to grasp the principles not merely
of kinds but of literatures, to identify or at least connect these with
national characteristics, and to extend the definition and comparison
beyond even the bounds of nations to national groups—that they would
base her claims. Here, perhaps, we may find ourselves in a distressing
inability to follow. Certainly, no one will deny that there are some
apparent national characteristics in literature; certainly no one will
say that it is useless or idle to attempt to separate the national and
the generic from the individual. But, in the first place, there was
nothing absolutely new in this, though it might be for almost the first
time used as a frequent implement, and as a fertile store-cupboard, in
literary research. Even the despised Middle Ages had had national
tickets for the different states of the European republic—had discovered
that the Englishman had a proud look and a high stomach, that he took
his pleasure sadly, and so forth. And had it been newer than it was, it
might still have been distrusted. After all, the literature of a nation,
though we talk of it as if it were something existent _per se_, is
merely the aggregate of the work of individuals. It is the work of those
individuals that you have to judge; and it is open to the very gravest
doubt whether, in trying the several cases, the general
inductive-deductive ready-to-hand estimate of the national quality is
not more of a snare than of a help. At any rate, experience proves that
those who have been readiest to use it, from Madame de Staël to M. Taine
and M. Texte—to name no living examples—have been more snared than
helped by it. Your preoccupation with the idea that the Englishman will
be insular and rebel to ideas, the German unpractical and
“inner-conscious,” the Frenchman logical, witty, tasteful, may very
likely, according to the weaknesses of the poor but constant creature
Human Nature, rather lead you to dispense with inquiry into the fact
whether he, the individual Briton, Teuton, or Gaul, does really exhibit
these characteristics. It will tempt you in the same way to exaggerate
what tendencies he may have to them—to force them on him if he has them
not—or even to leave him out of consideration if he is so impudent as
too incontestably not to have them.

And there is also the gravest possibility of doubt whether, even in
themselves, they have sufficient truth to make them of more than the
slightest value. After all, a man is a man before he is an Englishman or
a Frenchman; it is scarcely too paradoxical to say that he is himself
before he is even a man. The very greatest men of course carry this
disconcerting triumph of individuality furthest; all but the very
smallest help to flaunt its banner now and then. And when the hasty
generaliser generalises still more hastily, and talks about Literature
of the North and Literature of the South, the Rebellion of Fact is more
inconvenient still. You lay it down that the literature of the North
does not busy itself with frank youthful passion, and you have to settle
matters with _Romeo and Juliet_; that the Italian is a light-hearted
being whose only wants are sunshine, an olive or two, a flask of red
wine with a wisp of tow in it, and a _donna leggiadra_, and there rises
before you the _Divina Commedia_.

[Sidenote: _And actual._]

But this argument would tempt ourselves out of the way; and, even in so
far as it is legitimate here at all, is rather for the Interchapters.
Let it suffice that Madame de Staël is undoubtedly a notable figure in
the mere History of Criticism, and that, like nearly all such figures,
she has by no means lost her actual critical value; that she is no
“shadow”; that she is still, dead as she is, a speaking voice of some of
the perpetual forms and phases of criticism itself. That her
intellectual ability, if only of the receptive and transmissive kind,
was somewhat extraordinary, there can be little question. She frequently
claims for herself the invention of the word “vulgarity”: and though she
lived to be so unfortunate as to apply it[191] to Miss Austen—though it
has perhaps been more misused than any other single word of criticism—it
was needed. Nor was she herself much the dupe of words, though she often
was of supposed ideas. She has somewhere quoted from Rousseau, and
expanded, a wise protest against the requirement of a pedantic adherence
to definition in terminology. It was unlucky for her, no doubt, that to
some extent she came at, and could not but represent, one of those
rather unsatisfactory transition periods which are neither quite one
thing nor quite another. She has touches of classic “dignity” and of
philosophic cant, harlequinned with others of Romantic _sehnsucht_ and
“naturalistic” passion. Or rather she is like one of the
picture-cleaners’ sign-portraits—half in eighteenth century shadow, half
in nineteenth century light—or the other way about, if anybody chooses.

Yet the ill-luck is not total, and may perhaps even seem to be but
apparent. For it is precisely this _bariolage_, this partition, this
intermixture, which gives her not merely her historical position, but
even, I think, her intrinsic attraction as a critic. She helps us by
giving a fresh “triangulation,” a fresh aspect, a midway stage. Her
perfectibilism keys on as interestingly from the literary side to the
old Ancient-and-Modern dispute as on the political side to the
Republican manias of the time. Her struggles to retain some conviction
of the supremacy of Racine make more interesting, and are made more
interesting by, her admiration for Shakespeare and the Germans. Her
assimilations, or her attempts to assimilate, the new aesthetic, the new
historical theories, the new wine generally, would have far less
interest if she had put away all fancy for the old bottles. And so she
figures worthily and interestingly in what we have called the French
Transition, with a quaint enough contrast to Diderot, who opens it, and
who taught her German teachers. She is a figure of far less originality,
strangeness, and charm, but she has a more definite gospel, she is much
less diffused and dissipated over the _orbis scientiarum_, she points
more clearly to a clearly marked out path, and so she is much more
likely to be followed by the multitude, if not by the elect.

[Sidenote: _Chateaubriand: his difficulties._]

But she does not figure in her place alone: for side by side with her,
and with a face looking still more forward, is another figure, not less
curious, not less blended in its composition, but to some at least far
more interesting and far greater. Chateaubriand is one of those literary
personages to whom it is peculiarly difficult to do justice, and to whom
accordingly justice has very seldom been done. I admit that it was long
before I could myself regard him through glasses sufficiently
achromatic, or divest him of his accidents with a satisfactory
thoroughness. His personality—that troublesome and disturbing factor
from which we are so fortunately free in the case of most ancient
writers, and with which we are so teasingly confronted in the case of
most modern—is a little enigmatic and more than a little unsympathetic.
He trails with him the trumpery of two different times—Classical
emphasis, arbitrariness, even to some extent prejudice, Romantic
tawdriness, inconsequence, gush. He has curious adulteries of pedantry
and foppishness—strange and indecent communions of ignorance and
knowledge. And yet he is, in literature, so great a man that one
sometimes hardly knows how to construct any definition of greatness
which shall keep him out of the highest class. He has, and has by
anticipation, all the gifts of Byron except the gift of writing verse:
he can write prose which is hardly inferior to Byron’s verse in the
qualities where verse and prose touch nearest, and not much below all
but Byron’s best in some where they are farther apart. And he has other
gifts to which Byron can lay no claim.

[Sidenote: _His Criticism,_]

The chief of these gifts is criticism—a department in which Byron, for
all his shrewdness, simply does not count, because of the waywardness,
egotism, and personal prejudice which tinge every one of his critical
utterances, eulogistic or depreciatory. Now Chateaubriand counts in
criticism for a very great deal. By those who allow indirect critical
influence to rank Rousseau as a great critic, Chateaubriand ought to be
ranked as a critic infinitely greater; by those who observe a more rigid
and legitimate calculus, he can, as we shall shortly show, be ranked
almost, if not quite, in the first class. When a French critic or
historian[192] pronounces him the father of modern criticism, the first
to start the comparative method, and so forth, he is, as we are all
inclined, and as French critics used to be extravagantly, and are still
rather excessively inclined to do, speaking as if what is true of his
own nation and literature were true universally. We must, of course, go
a long way back in time, and some way afield in place—to the middle of
the eighteenth century in the one case, to England and Germany in the
other—for the real first appearances (“origins” is always a misleading
word) of these things, and even if we cling to France we must deal with
the vaguer but far older claims of Diderot. But Chateaubriand represents
them powerfully. He represents them practically before Madame de Staël,
in a much more literary fashion, and with much more literary power, and
he represents them with a magic, with a contagious influence, to which
she cannot pretend. Further, he possesses that claim which is the first,
if not the sole claim for us, though it seems to be regarded by some
with jealousy, and almost with resentment, the claim of having actually
written criticism, and a great deal of it.

[Sidenote: _Indirect_]

The champions of the Indirect have, it must be confessed, not a little
to rely upon in Chateaubriand. He was so much more intensely _literary_
than Rousseau, and even than Madame de Staël, that _Atala_, _René_, _Les
Natchez_, _Le Dernier Abencérage_ still more, _Les Martyrs_ most of all,
and even not a few things in the _Mémoires d’Outre Tombe_, may without
violence be twisted into a literary bearing. All, in their different
degrees and ways, exhibit the author’s insatiable curiosity as to the
literature of different times, countries, religions, languages, and his
indefatigable industry in staining and twining his own literature with
the colours and the threads of these others. But it is quite unnecessary
to twist and infer, to force the “this must have” and the “we can see,”
when we have two such documents before us as the _Essai sur La
Littérature Anglaise_, and, above all, the _Génie du Christianisme_.

[Sidenote: _and Direct._]

As a matter of fact, by far the larger part of this latter famous book,
the _revanche_ for Voltairianism, the manifesto of the whole earlier,
and not a little of the later nineteenth century, the main pillar of its
author’s fame,[193] is literary criticism pure and simple. It is so odd
a place to look for this that it sometimes escapes. Accounts of
Chateaubriand have been written (I am, I fear, guilty of one myself) in
which it has had no adequate recognition. But when we have once sighted
our panther,[194] she cannot escape us; and we may try here to do
justice to the real sweetness of her breath.[195]

[Sidenote: _The_ Génie du Christianisme.]

So odd a place: and that, too, in more ways than one. At first sight—and
perhaps too hasty or not thoroughly informed readers permanently—the
_Génie_[196] may appear an inextricable tangle, or a frank flinging
together of fragments without even the connection of being tangled. It
would be improved (and perhaps such a thing has been done) by a table
like that which Burton wisely prefixed to the _Anatomy_. One has to
realise the utter _terrassement_ in France of Christian doctrine and
practice—the all but total triumph of that purely secular education and
atmosphere for which a hundred years later some of our Nonconformists
pant—to appreciate the real art and the practical necessity of the
fashion in which Chateaubriand “lets everything go in” against
Philosophism. It seems temerity, but was probably wisdom, to begin, as
he begins, with the altitudes of faith and dogma. And he glides off from
them, cunningly but most naturally, to those ceremonies, sacramental and
other, for which the Republic had substituted unmeaning and unaffecting
civil functions. Then he once more attacks the _philosophes_ on their
own ground—on the subject of morals and that “virtue” which they had so
tediously dinned into the

public ear, but of which they had made so little private exhibition,—and
grapples courageously, though perhaps not rashly, considering the
extreme sciolism of most of his adversaries, with cosmology and
teleology, with physic and metaphysic, with Hell and Heaven themselves.
In all, his rhetoric serves him admirably, if nothing else does; but we
have as yet little or nothing to do with literature or with criticism.
It is quite different when we come to the “Second Part,” _Poétique du
Christianisme_, and here Chateaubriand begins to present his credentials
as a critic. Nor, with some digressions, does he again drop the
character throughout the book.

[Sidenote: _Its saturation with literary criticism._]

The proceeding[197] was probably more logical than it seems. On the one
hand the attack on religion had been overwhelmingly, and the attack on
civil order very largely, literary in its own character and weapons. In
the second, the everlasting _philosophe_-republican chatter about the
Greeks and the Romans had more than reconstituted the old classical and
“ancient” prejudice. Madame de Staël had not shared this latter; but she
had failed to share it principally because of her perfectibilism, which
had put down the merits of the ancients chiefly to their republican
constitutions. Here were a whole host of things for Chateaubriand to
deal with; and in every case the literary way was an obvious line of
attack, as well as one intensely congenial to the new champion. He is no
perfectibilist, of course; in fact, one of the appendices of the _Génie_
is a _Letter to Fontanes_[198] on the second edition of the _De la
Littérature_, combating its views. But his championship of “modern”
literature is based upon its Christianisation, and he compares famous
ancient with famous modern poets on purpose to show first, how
Christianity has enabled the latter to rise to nobler heights; secondly,
how some at least of the best points of the ancients themselves are to
be found in contact with Christian ethics. Like his feminine opponent,
he has some not quite cleanly rags of classicism and Gallicism about
him. A too sanguine hope may be dashed when it finds him talking about
the “bad taste” of Dante, and the “defects” of his age. But Romanticism,
no more than its far-off godmother Rome, was to be built in a day.

[Sidenote: _Survey and examples._]

And we very soon see that for all these remains of “the old man,” and
for all a certain necessary ignorance (he thinks there is nothing
mediæval before Dante but “a few poems in barbarous Latin),” despite
also such antiquated arbitrarinesses as the admission as a fault in the
Milton whom he so much admires, and in the Dante whom he admires rather
less, that “the marvellous is the _subject_ and not the _machine_ of the
poem”—we very soon see on what side Chateaubriand is fighting. He
hazards at the very opening the doctrine—shocking to the whole French
eighteenth century, and contrary to Aristotle—that the Epic is not only
larger in bulk, but higher, greater, more varied, more universal indeed,
in kind and range, than the drama. And perhaps this is as much a
dividing principle of criticism as anything else. I hold myself, as has
been made obvious, with those who think that the drama is only
accidentally literary, though it has been so now and again, for long
periods, in the very highest degree; while the epic is literary or
nothing—it is, with lyric, the beginning of all literature. But, however
this may be, the whole drift of his criticism is anti-neoclassic. Again
and again he contrasts passages and long scenes from Homer and Milton,—
not to show how superior Homer is, as the French neoclassics would have
done, as Addison had done—not even to show how superior Milton himself
is—not to defend Milton by Homer’s example,—but to show how they are
_differently_ excellent. A most interesting and novel critical
suggestion is that of trying to realise how a modern poet _would have_
done what an ancient poet _has_ done, the whole lesson of the
comparative method being here in little.

I shall hardly be expected, though I should much like, to analyse and
represent the whole of these twelve books, to which something has even
to be added from the six last. The turning of the tables on the
_Henriade_[199] (which is treated most politely), with a sincere lament
that, while the finest places of its author’s poems are inspired by
religion, he has not more fully inspired himself therewith in this
particular poem (the subject of which so obviously requires it!) is
ingeniously malicious. We may take mediocre interest in the contrasts of
Lusignan and Andromaque, Guzman and Iphigénie,[200] but they are full of
delicate and acute critical observation, which shows itself again in the
comparison of Virgil and Racine.[201] So too we may dispute the epigram
that “la barbarie et le polythéisme ont produit les héros d’Hómère; la
barbarie et le Christianisme ont enfanté les chevaliers du Tasse”;[202]
but the whole passage where this occurs is connected with the
all-important devotion to Chivalry. When he comes to passion we may
again desiderate something different from the comparison of Dido and
Phèdre.[203] But this was what was wanted “for _them_”; and there is no
fault to find with the treatment of Pope’s handling of Héloise.[204]
With the author’s ecstacies over _Paul et Virginie_,[205] few people now
living can sympathise; but once more _Paul et Virginie_ was good “for
_them_.” Virginie is only a victim of nasty prudishness when you compare
her to Nausicaa, but she might easily be taken for a mirror of purity in
the age of Madame de Warens and Madame de Puisieux. The fine passage on
“Le Vague des Passions” which serves to introduce _René_ is of great
critical importance, though it may have been partly suggested by
Bossuet.

The paradox of the beginning of the book on the Marvellous[206]—that
mythology belittled nature and made description abortive—is at least
exceedingly ingenious, as is what follows on Allegory; but
Chateaubriand’s account of the history of modern descriptive poetry
itself suffers from want of knowledge.[207] Still, in attacking the
position that pagan mythology was a more poetic subject than Christian,
it must be admitted that he is excellent on Angels,[208] and that his
comparison of Venus in the Carthaginian woods and Raphael in Eden, is
one of the best of those companion-pieces in which he so delights, and
which are such engaging criticism. We cannot follow him through dreams
and through “machines,” through Hell and through Tartarus; nor even give
much space to the bold, elaborate, and often admirably critical
comparison of Homer and the Bible.[209] But these things, like the
others mentioned before, all illustrate the range, the height, the
Pisgah quality—or rather that still higher quality of the mountain view
in _Paradise Regained_—to which Chateaubriand’s criticism can justly
pretend. These thirty pages are perhaps his most elaborate and ambitious
critical attempt, and they deserve to be thoroughly studied.

Hardly less remarkable is the Third Part, which deals with a sort of
clash of influences—that of Christianity on the Fine Arts, and that of
the Fine Arts, Christianity, and Literature on each other. The
wonderfully prophetic instinct of the writer is shown in what he says of
the Gregorian chant, as well as of Gothic architecture, and he brings
them very close to letters; but of course he comes closer still in
dealing with History, Oratory, and the like. And he manages, in a
surprising fashion, not to keep very far from it, even in his last part,
that of “Worship.”

[Sidenote: _Single points of excellence,_]

These exercitations are diversified and illustrated by constant
expressions and _aperçus_ of real critical power, showing, if, as we
have said, necessarily not complete, yet very considerable, and for the
time remarkable knowledge. Chateaubriand knows all about _Ossian_; and
he corrects Madame de Staël’s amiable and ignorant enthusiasms with a
politeness which must have been insufferable to the good lady. He has
the right phrase exactly[210] for that singular failure of a genius the
Père Lemoyne—a phrase which may not improbably have suggested Flaubert’s
gorgeous _Tentation_, and which is, as it were, a keynote or
_remarque_-index in relation to the critical imagination of modern
times. He has not merely this altered tone in _excelsis_, but also in
details:—as witness the very remarkable note at i. 260, on the effects
of a particular vowel (whether “first discovered” or not does not
matter). On the very same part his open-mindedness is shown in the warm
and just praise given to André Chénier—dead and unpublished—and a little
later in a delicate protest against the inconsistency of Rivarol’s
translation of _Quel giorno piu non vi leggemmo avante_. The characters
of the ancient historians are sketched with a masterly brevity in III.
iii. 3, and there is an astonishing moderation and justice, as well as a
sort of chivalry, in his frequent encounters with Voltaire.

[Sidenote: _and general importance._]

But the greatest glory of Chateaubriand is that he is, if not the
creator, the first brilliant exponent of what we have called above the
Critical Imagination—the first great practitioner of imaginative
criticism since Longinus himself. Lessing and Diderot had no doubt shown
the way to this, but the first was not quite enthusiastic enough, and
the second was enthusiastic to and over the verge of dithyramb. The
Schlegels and Goethe had practised in it; but the two former were not
great enough men of letters, and the most ambitious attempts of Goethe,
such as that in _Wilhelm Meister_, are spoilt by deplorable
longwindednesses and pedantries. Chateaubriand is one of the very first
to take the new stream, _remis atque velis_, plying the oars of the
intellect, and catching the wind of the spirit. His occasional
delinquencies in the use of the phrase _mauvais goût_; his deference to
the old opinion that the hero of tragedy must necessarily be what we
called then in English “a high fellow”; other things of the same kind;
do not matter in the very least. Every one of them could be set off
against a corresponding expression of freedom from neo-classic
prejudice; and there would remain a mighty balance of such utterances on
the credit side.[211]

[Sidenote: _Joubert—his reputation._]

The critical position of Joubert, acclaimed soon after the posthumous
publication of his work[212] by the greatest critical authorities, has
sometimes been questioned in later days, but quite idly. Readers of
these pages must have seen, if indeed they did not know it long before,
that a large body of critical, as of other opinion, is merely
negligible. It does not rest upon any solid knowledge or argument; it is
in many cases not even the expression of a genuine personal preference,
illusion, or impression of any kind. Sometimes the critic does not like
the other critics who have expressed approval of the author; sometimes
he does not like some individual utterance or group of utterances of the
author’s own; more often he simply wishes “to be different”—to blame
where his predecessors have praised, and to extol to the skies what they
have disapproved or left unnoticed. In all such cases the verdict need
not even be seriously fought before any court of cassation; it is
self-quashed.

The remarkable body of judgment by French critics[213] from Sainte-Beuve
downwards, which is prefixed to the usual editions of the
_Correspondance_, especially if it be supplemented by Mr Arnold’s famous
essay, is almost “document” enough of Joubert’s worth; but we cannot
here avoid full examination of him, especially as hardly one of these
critics has taken our exact point of view. We can neglect the great body
of Joubert’s miscellaneous _Pensées_ and concentrate ourselves on those
affecting literature, which practically begin[214] under the heading _De
l’Antiquité_, appear both here and in the subsequent headings with
general titles, and of course constitute the substance of “On Poetry,”
“On Style,” “On the Qualities of the Writer,” and “Literary Judgments.”

[Sidenote: _His literary_ αὐτάρκεια.]

In literature, with an exception to be noticed presently, his time
exerts remarkably little influence on Joubert. This is not the case
elsewhere; in his religious, political, moral, social judgments we feel—
and it could not be but that we should feel—the pressure, and the
shadow, and the sting, of the Revolution everywhere. But the literature
is—as literature is but too seldom and ought always to be—presented
(except in one way) with a sort of _autarkeia_. Joubert was born in
mid-eighteenth century, and he died just as the Romantic movement was in
full bud and had begun to burst, with the _Odes et Ballades_. But he is
neither a hard and fast classic, nor a revolter of the extreme kind
against classicism, nor, like those not uninteresting contemporaries of
his whom we shall group after him, blown hither and thither by the wind
of this or that doctrine. He betrays, indeed, the enfranchising and
widening influence of Diderot; but he has worked this out quite
independently, and with a “horizontality” and comparative range of view
in which the early Romantics themselves (except Sainte-Beuve) were
conspicuously lacking, and which even Sainte-Beuve never fully attained.
[Sidenote: _The Law of Poetry._] The famous, the immortal, ninth
“Pensée” of the Poetry section,[215] “Rien de qui ne transporte pas
n’est poésie: La lyre est en quelque manière un instrument ailé,” is
positively startling. It is, of course, only Longinus, dashed a little
with Plato, and transferred from the abstract Sublime to the sublimest
part of literature Poetry. But generations had read and quoted Longinus
without making the transfer; and when made it is _en quelque manière_
(to use the author’s judicious limitation, which some people dislike so
much), final. Like other winged things, and more than any of them,
poetry is itself hard to catch; it is difficult to avoid crushing and
maiming it when you think to catch it. But this is as nearly perfect a
definition by resultant, by form, as can be got at.

[Sidenote: _More on that subject._]

Of course all the utterances are not at this level. The fault of the
“Pensée” itself in general, is that, in human necessity, it will miss,
or only go near ten times (perhaps a hundred) for once that it hits; and
it is easy enough for a hostile critic in turn to hit the misses. But it
is the hits that count; and, as for them, how astonishing is it to come
across at this date (No. xxv.), “Les beaux vers sont ceux qui s’exhalent
comme des sons ou des parfums,” where you have, put perfectly, all the
truth that exists in the “symbolist” theory of some seventy years later!
Again (xxxviii.) “Dans le style poétique chaque mot retentit comme le
son d’une lyre bien montée, et laisse toujours après lui un grand nombre
d’ondulations”—where the great quality of the best nineteenth-century
poetry, of that poetry of which hardly anything had been written in
France and Germany, and of which Joubert could hardly know what had
already been written in England—the contingent, additional music
superadded to meaning,—is hit off perfectly once more. Then there is the
second best known and most famous passage (xli.), forbidding the “lieu
trop réel,” the “population trop historique,” and enjoining the “espèce
de lieu fantastique,” in which the poet can move at pleasure; and that
other fatal saying (xlvi.), “On ne peut trouver de poésie nulle part
quand on n’en porte pas en soi,” and the reiteration (xlix.) of the
capital doctrine as to the beauty of words—of words even detached from
context. Taking them together, these ten pages of Joubert contain more
truth—more stimulating, suggestive, germinal truth—about poetry, than
any other single treatise from Aristotle down to the present day. This
is the way a man must think of poetry if he is to be saved; though not
every clause of the Joubertian creed is thus Athanasian.

[Sidenote: _On Style._]

The Style section is equally astonishing. I think I first read Joubert
about thirty years ago; I know his ancestors and his successors much
better now; but he astonishes me just as much as ever. In another rather
longer[216] stretch you have the best things in Aristotle, Longinus, and
others—some at least of which he pretty certainly had neither read nor
heard of—revised and applied; you have the principles and the practice
of Hugo, Gautier, Saint-Victor, Flaubert, of Ruskin, Arnold, Pater, put
plumply or by suggestion beforehand in eighteen pages.

Here is everything: the necessity of choice which is the condition of
good style, and which works so differently in ancient and modern times;
the powers of “the word” in all their varied bearings; the excellence of
archaism rightly understood, and the occasional charms of the _kuria_ as
a rest and interval for refreshment; the right to reinvest an old word
with new meaning; the “science of names”; the placing of words; the
freedom which the reader possesses of improving on his author by keeping
his word and adding to his sense; the difference between musical and
pictorial style; the impossibility of literature when words are used
with an absolutely fixed value; the unpardonable sin of mere purism; the
natural and justifiable idiosyncrasy of dictionary and even grammar in
good writers, with the due guards against its excess; the variety of
degree in which ancient authors are to be followed; the value and the
danger of idioms. These and a hundred other things will all be found,
sometimes of course (the fault of the form again) put too absolutely;
sometimes, though very rarely, intermixed with things more dubious—but
always present at short, at all but the shortest notice. Never, I think,
did any critical writer enter so much into the marrow of things in so
limited a space: the section is a sort of _Tinctura Fortior_, as the
pharmacopœias say, or even like those older “drop-cordials” of story,
where a vial the size of the little finger contained the virtue of a
whole pharmacy.

[Sidenote: _Miscellaneous Criticisms._]

These two sections form the _aureus libellus_ of Joubert—if I knew a
wealthy and sensible, intelligent and obliging bibliophile, they should
be printed on vellum and adorned by the greatest decorative artists of
the age, and bound in the simplest but the most perfect coat obtainable.
We decline slightly with the two remaining chapters—though there is
still plenty of gold to be found—and the decline is continuous. In the
section “Des Qualités de L’écrivain et des Compositions Littéraires” we
once more approach the merely philosophic side, and it is Joubert
himself who has left us, apropos of _Corinne_, the memorable proposition
that sometimes “un besoin de philosopher gâte tout.”[217] A fine
distinction (not so expressed) between realist and idealist
literature[218] is an instance of the consolation which is constantly
occurring; but we must look for relapses. What do we learn by being
told[219] that “Homer, Euripides, and Menander” (O groves of Blarney!)
had more _facilité pour le beau_ than Hesiod and Sophocles; Æschylus,
Dante, and La Bruyère less than Fénelon and J. J. Rousseau? The context
indeed shows (not by any means in so many words) what gloss is to be put
on _facilité_ and what on _beau_ to get out Joubert’s meaning; but the
result is not worth the trouble. And when we find afterwards that _la
facilité est opposée au sublime_ we agree, but, recurring, ask whether
Homer is less sublime than Hesiod? The sub-sections on criticism (§ cxl.
_sq._) are excellent, and a fairly severe winnowing would leave a
residue not much less valuable than in the other two: but the winnowing
is necessary.

[Sidenote: _His individual judgments more dubious._]

The fact may prepare the wary reader for some further inequality in the
last section of “Jugements Littéraires,” with which should be taken
certain letters to Molé in the _Correspondance_. To prevent
disappointment and even puzzlement it is here necessary to remember
Joubert’s “time, country, and circumstance.” He was a man, let it be
repeated, of the mid-eighteenth century by birth; a Frenchman, and not,
it would seem, by any means widely acquainted with foreign languages and
literatures, except classics. He always speaks as if he could only read
Milton in translations; his knowledge of Shakespeare, though he admired
him, is derived from the same untrustworthy source; of any large part of
English literature he necessarily knows nothing at all. Accordingly—in a
fashion which is nearly unique in this history, but which is priceless
in its unicity—the disadvantages which have been powerless to affect his
general conceptions recover their hold upon him, to some extent, in
particulars. He is still sound on what the _general_ merits of poetry
and of literature should be; but he sees those merits in the wrong
place. At first sight, to an English reader who is not thoroughly broken
to the ways of our difficult art, it may seem impossible, inconceivable,
a bad joke, that the author of the aphorisms above quoted as to the
necessity of “transport,” the power of words, and all the rest of it,
should admire Delille and not admire Milton. But remember, he understood
the _words_ of Delille—they had, feeble as they were, the power to
excite, according to his own true and profound theory, that poetry which
was ready to answer and magnify them in his own soul. He did not
understand the _words_ of Milton, and they could not touch him; while he
is certainly not to blame for not being touched by the words of Louis
Racine.

[Sidenote: _The reason for this._]

This is the most striking instance, the most astounding at first, the
most illuminative afterwards; and it will give us a key to all the rest.
It must for instance be a fresh stumbling-block, and no small one, to
find Joubert, who could prefer Delille to Milton, quite cool, almost
harsh, to Racine, saying that Racine is “the Virgil of the ignorant,”
that those whom he suffices are “poor souls and poor wits.” But the way
round the obstacle is perfectly clear to the practised traveller in our
country. Racine’s was not the poetry of Joubert’s own time and
generation; Delille’s was. His language, his words, his imagery could
convey whatsoever of poetry was in them—though it might not be very
much—to Joubert’s ears and wit and soul better than Racine’s could. And
once more, as those ears and wit and soul were exquisitely sensitive to
even a trace of poetry that _did_ reach them, the difficulty becomes no
difficulty at all, but, on the contrary, a real paradox of the most
illuminating and helpful kind, constantly to be remembered, and
especially good against those estimable doctrinaires who will have a
hard and fast hierarchy in poetry, a “best, better, good, not so good,
bad,” arranged in rigid classes. _That is poetry to a man which produces
on him such poetical effects as he is capable of receiving._ The reader
takes it, as the writer makes it, _poeticamente_. You may possibly—it is
not certain, but it is possible—_educate_ his poetic sense; say to it,
“Friend, come up higher.” You may certainly remove merely mechanical
obstacles, such as Joubert’s ignorance of English. But until something
of this kind is done, it is better that the man should even excessively
admire Burns or Béranger, Macaulay or Moore, than that he should
simulate admiration of Shelley, or Hugo, or Heine. It would be pleasant
to dwell on this, which has never, I think, been dwelt upon, or
expounded fully before; but words to the wise must be here, as always,
our motto: the hints given can easily here, as elsewhere, be expanded by
those who have the wits and the inclination.

[Sidenote: _Additional illustrations._]

Some further instances, however, may and must be given of the working of
this curious state of things, which makes a critic equal to the very
greatest we have met in abstract appreciation of poetry and literature,
the inferior of many we have met—if not of most who were good critics at
all—in his appreciation of individuals. There is the germ of a most
important general censure on “Naturalism” (a thing once more far ahead)
in his remark on Boccaccio, that he “adds nothing to the story,” that he
“respects the tale as he would respect a truth,” a position interesting
to compare with the constant protests of the Goncourts and their fellows
against what has been called “_dis_realising.”[220] “Boileau est un
grand poète, mais dans la demi-poésie,” though a little epigrammatic, is
true enough. His few remarks on Molière argue, as we should expect, a
rather lukewarm admiration; but he is among the highest praisers of La
Fontaine, ranking him as (of course this is before the nineteenth
century) fuller of poetry than any other French author. (Note again that
this means, “fuller of poetry _which can bring itself into contact with
Joubert’s mind_.”) He admits that his beloved Delille has only “sounds
and colours” in his head, but then they are the sounds and colours that
Joubert can see and hear, and he knows rightly that sounds and colours
make more than half of poetry. As for the ancients, he remarks with
great truth, that Cicero, whom nevertheless he admired much, has “more
taste and discernment than real criticism.” And then we find the
moralist in the remark, that Catullus unites the “two things which make
the worst mixture in the world, _mignardise_ and coarseness,” and that
“ses airs sont jolis, mais son instrument est baroque,” another curious
instance of the inability of the Latin race to value the second greatest
poet of Latin. Joubert, you see, did not like the indecency of Catullus,
and he did not like his “bitterness,” as Quintilian calls it; and the
dislike barred the poetic contact. On the other hand, he could see and
feel Tacitus. That Pascal is “exempt from all passion” seems an odd
judgment, though I could, I think, explain it. He is excellent on
Bossuet and Fénelon: less so, I think, on Malebranche.

On his own eighteenth century one turns to him with much interest, but
the utterances are too detailed for us to linger on them. They have the
perspicacity (if sometimes a little of the injustice) of an escaped
pupil of the _philosophes_. He is very valuable on Rousseau, but that “a
Voltaire is good for nothing at any time,” though he had acknowledged
many literary gifts and graces in this Voltaire, is not merely unjust,
but _saugrenu_. Still it certainly raises the point of law, whether
“good for nothing” literature, which is good literature, is not good for
something.

[Sidenote: _General remarks._]

A few more general remarks may perhaps be made on this critic, who
contrasts so remarkably with all the rest of the critics of the Empire,
and not least remarkably with his friend Chateaubriand and with Madame
de Staël, beside whom alone of this numerous group he can be placed. It
will be seen that while he is free from “Corinne’s” hasty
generalisations and indigestible “philosophy of literature,” while he
has a less extended knowledge of literatures (though probably a much
more accurate one) than hers, he actually far transcends her in real
philosophy of view, that he takes a sight of all poetry, all literature,
and their qualities, which is aquiline alike in sweep and searchingness.
Further, that though his knowledge is again more accurate than
Chateaubriand’s, it is more circumscribed, and that he cannot relish
some particular things which Chateaubriand could, yet that once more he
excels his friend in clearness, ideality, comprehension, and depth. That
finally (though the matter of this is to come), in comparison with all
the other Empire critics, from Fontanes and Geoffroy downwards, a
similar _distinguendum_ has to be observed. One Joubert—the Joubert of
the general views and of the sections on style and poetry—is far over
their heads, out of their sight and reach. The other Joubert—the Joubert
of the particular judgments—is very much nearer them, though he is
sometimes, not always, their superior.

What is certain, however, is, that this particular kind of doubleness
(we have seen others more common) is extraordinarily rare—that though
faint touches of it may appear here and there, they are not more than
faint. Joubert’s descriptions of poetry and his admiration of Delille
are no parallel to Longinus’ definitions of the Sublime and his failure
fully to admire the _Odyssey_. There is no conflict of the higher and
the lower rule, but only an unexampled—yet when we come to think of it,
perfectly natural—inability to get the higher rule into play. If one
could have had not merely the gift of tongues, but the gift of
conferring it, it would have been perhaps the most interesting
experiment possible in the critical sphere to have made Joubert a
thorough proficient in English, and _then_ to have seen whether he
failed to see the beauties of Milton. Meanwhile he remains isolated. I
do not think Mr Arnold’s comparison of him to Coleridge a very happy
one, though there are no doubt certain resemblances—the Coleridgean
depreciation of French poetry in relation to the Joubertian of English
is the most striking of these, and might seem sufficient. I do not think
Coleridge depreciated French poetry because he could not hear it: Mr
Arnold himself practically admitted that _he_ did, and he is therefore
himself a better parallel. And Coleridge had the excuse, which Mr Arnold
had not, that French had, in literature accessible to him, hardly tried
the whole compass of its lyre at all. But this is a digression, only
excused by its helping to point the assertion that there is no one like
Joubert—for Mr Arnold himself knew French very well indeed.

[Sidenote: _The other “Empire Critics.”_]

To all these three remarkable writers the term “Empire Critics,” which
has obtained a certain solid position in critical history from the use
made of it by Sainte-Beuve,[221] might, as far as chronology goes, be
applied. But they are not the writers who are generally denoted by the
term, these being rather a group extending from Fontanes through
Ginguené, Garat, Geoffroy, Dussault, Feletz, Lemercier, Marie-Joseph
Chenier, Hoffman, and others, down to Villemain and Cousin, who belong
in part even to the Second Empire, but still represent an older
tradition than the men strictly of 1830. They have been of late somewhat
forgotten and neglected, despite Sainte-Beuve’s weighty pleas for
them;[222] and perhaps in hardly a single case (I am not forgetting the
once mighty name of Villemain himself) do they supply us with a critic
of the highest class. But they are extremely important to history; we
cannot really understand the criticism of the last seventy years itself
without them. And I do not regret the time that I have myself spent on
them, though I do not propose, as Agamemnon would say, to equal my
treatment of them to that time itself.

[Sidenote: _Fontanes._]

The novice in these matters who goes from Sainte-Beuve’s repeated and
respectful notices of Fontanes to the latter’s _Œuvres_[223] may be a
little puzzled, even if he take due heed to the fact that these Works
are, as far as the criticism goes at any rate, only “selected.” There is
not very much in bulk; and what there is may not seem, according to the
severe Arnoldian standard, “chief and principal.” An introduction and
some notes to his translation of the _Essay on Man_, articles on
Chateaubriand, on Madame de Staël, on the “emphatic” Thomas, &c.:—“we
can do all these for ourselves if we want them, which we mostly do not,”
is likely to be the verdict of the impatient.

But it should not be allowed to stand. Fontanes shows us, in a manner
made more historically important by the fact that for a long time he was
a sort of Minister of Literature to Napoleon, that turning, that
transition, which is the subject of this whole chapter. He still, and
naturally, has a great deal of the eighteenth century in him; but he can
see the vacuity and the frigidity of eighteenth-century “emphasis.” He
is responsible[224] for teaching Victor Hugo that Voltaire taught _us_
to admire Shakespeare, one of the most remarkable mare’s-nests in
critical history. But, his eyes perhaps sharpened a little by personal
friendship, he perceived to a very large extent, if not fully, the
importance of the _Génie du Christianisme_. So there may have been mixed
motives in his different reception of Madame de Staël’s theories; but
there is a singular and satisfactory compound of eighteenth-century good
sense and nineteenth-century catholicity in his dealing with her
fantasticalities about North and South. He is himself rather rhetorical
at times, but seldom to the loss of sobriety; and he is altogether a
good sample, a good tell-tale, of the attitude of the inhabitants of a
landslip—as we may call it—who see their old marks changing relation and
bearing, who do not wholly like it, but who are capable of adapting
themselves, at any rate to some extent, to the change.

[Sidenote: _Geoffroy._]

Another interesting and representative person is Geoffroy,[225] who
incurred the strictures of Joubert, and has had them “passed on” by Mr
Arnold. Geoffroy—the pillar for many years of the _Année Littéraire_ and
of the _Débats_, the “Folliculus” of Luce de Lancival—has received from
Gosse (M. Etienne, not Mr Edmund) the praise of having “toujours marché
dans la même route et à la lueur du flambeau qu’il avait choisi dès le
commencement.” In other words _immutatus et immutabilis_—an attribution
magnificent in some relations of life; not, perhaps, as we have before
noted, in criticism. Geoffroy’s road and torch might have been better
chosen.

He, too, feels his time—if he is by no means a Romantic before or at the
birth of Romanticism, he is hardly more of a Voltairian. But he is first
of all “against” everything and everybody—a child of Momus.[226] He is
doubtful about Corneille and Molière; even Racine is not “perfect” for
him. But his most characteristic passage is perhaps one which occurs at
page 137, vol. ii., of his work cited below. It is a real _point de
repère_, because it is one of the last authoritative expressions of a
sentiment—no doubt not yet extinct, but for a long time kept to some
extent in check—the French belief in the absolute superiority of French
literature and the impossibility of a foreigner being a judge of it—the
impertinence even of his attempting to judge it. Geoffroy rates Blair in
the most approved pedagogic fashion for expressing the opinion—now
probably entertained by the majority of Frenchmen themselves—that
_Phèdre_ is a greater play than _Iphigénie_, and for assigning the
reason that _Iphigénie_ is too French. He blames the Edinburgh professor
roundly for “meddling with our authors”; the opinions are not disputable
opinions merely—they are “errors”; Blair and Edinburgh “ought to be
ashamed” of them; they show that the critic “knows nothing about the
matter.” Similar things are, of course, said to-day in England as well
as in France; but _they_ only show the temper of the particular critic,
not the theory of prevailing criticism. Yet Geoffroy, if only from
cross-grainedness, helped in the unsettling of the merely traditional
view of literature: and so did service.

[Sidenote: _Dussault._]

His contemporary and fellow-worker on the _Débats_, Dussault, is of a
different type.[227] He is much more amiable in his judgments—has,
indeed, the credit of being a sort of maker of things pleasant all
round; but he is in principle much more reactionary—he is perhaps the
most so of this group of critics, till they were exacerbated by the
Revolters, to whom he himself refers as _anarchistes littéraires_. He is
a staunch Bolæan; and if he has to admit (as with the growth of literary
history it was by his time almost impossible for any one not to admit)
that the _Art Poétique_ is not complete, _c’est du moins bien écrit_.
But he goes far beyond this elsewhere; and on the 26th of April, 1817—
the very year when a certain _enfant sublime_ presented himself as a
competitor for an Academic prize—he asks, undoubting of the fact,
“Pourquoi la constitution du Parnasse est elle si solide et si durable?”
That the disciples of the Greek and Latin Muses should have anything to
learn by going to “Runes” and such like things is _nullement possible_.
Fairy tales are “absurd.” Even the _avant-courriers_ of the French
classic age meet with no mercy; and Balzac himself is credited merely
with “bad taste.”

[Sidenote: _Hoffman, Garat, &c._]

Of another member of the staff of the _Débats_ in its early days,
Hoffman, I know less than of these.[228] He was, like most of the group,
a dramatist, and as might be expected, and as was the case with all of
them, the double employments reacted not quite beneficially on each
other. Like Geoffroy (with whom, however, he was at variance, and who
told him in effect, with characteristic sweetness, to go back to his
dramatic gallipots and leave criticism alone) he frowned on the youth of
Romanticism, and seems generally to have been of the race and lineage of
Rymer. Garat, not very weighty as a politician, possesses little more
worth, if any, as a critic, though he had vogue as an _éloge_-writer.
Daunou, who wrote noticeable notices on Ginguené and others, began his
career by a critical essay, two years before the Revolution, on the
influence of Boileau, and was during all his life more or less concerned
with criticism. But he was more of a historian and student of the
political sciences than of a literary critic of the pure breed. Etienne,
Fiévée, Legouvé the elder, the two Lacretelles, Andrieux,[229] and
others, we must also pass by, though I have matter for speaking of all
of them: but Ginguené, M. J. Chénier, Népomucène Lemercier, and Feletz
are not to be thus dismissed.

[Sidenote: _Ginguené._]

The first was an older man than most of the group—in fact, he was over
forty at the date of the Revolution, from the tender mercies of which he
was only saved by Thermidor. But he ranks in literature, and especially
in critical literature, chiefly by his _Histoire Littéraire
d’Italie_,[230] which did not begin to appear till the second decade of
the nineteenth century had opened, and was one of the earliest of these
comprehensive surveys of literature—other than the writer’s own or than
that of antiquity—which have had almost more to do than anything else
with the formation of modern criticism. He has been accused of relying
too much on Tiraboschi for his material; but the vice of looking rather
at the commentators than at the texts was an old one, inherited from
classical scholarship, and is by no means extinct a hundred years after
Ginguené's time; and he is rather less tinged with it than we might
expect. His judgments on such—to a Frenchman of the eighteenth century—
dangerous writers as Dante and La Casa have considerable merit.

[Sidenote: _M. J. Chénier._]

Marie-Joseph Chénier, in other respects besides his relations to his
ill-fated and illustrious brother, appears to have been an unpopular and
disputable person: nor, putting his considerable satiric power aside,
can he be called a great man of letters. But, I think, his _Tableau de
la Littérature Française depuis 1789_,[231] has been rather undervalued.
It is not, of course, free from the common defects of these surveys,
especially when taken _à bout portant_; it notices much that we do not
want noticed at all, belittles important things, takes refuge in stock
phrases and _clichés_ so as to get the business over. But it is often
acute and very much less one-sided and hide-bound than La Harpe or
Geoffroy—recognising, for instance, in opposition to the latter, that
Blair is “always just” to French writers. And it supplies us, written as
it was just before the dawn of Romanticism (for Chénier died in 1811),
with some interesting and necessarily unbiassed views. People, he
says,[232] do not read Le Bossu at all, and they read Bouhours very
little. He greatly prefers Diderot and Marmontel (though he thinks them
“paradoxical”) to Batteux; and if he is complimentary to Voltaire and
even to Thomas, rejoices in Fénelon and Corneille. He cannot, or will
not, understand Chateaubriand;[233] but he takes frequent opportunity,
under the guise of noticing translations, to refer to and estimate
English and German literature. In short, he is open to the reproach of
“not knowing where he is,” but the very evidences of this are useful to
us.

[Sidenote: _Lemercier._]

Still more relatively, and very much more intrinsically interesting, is
Népomucène Lemercier—that singular first sketch of a Victor Hugo, who,
naturally enough, would have none of Victor Hugo himself when he
appeared, and who, in a cruel trick of Fate and Death, was actually
supplanted by Hugo in his Academic Chair. It is unfortunate that
Lemercier’s _Cours de Littérature Générale_[234] is not a very common
book. It has something of the excessive generalisation of the
eighteenth-century—men were struck by the effect of measured sounds and
wrote poetry, &c.; and he still sticks to Kinds a good deal. But his
independence is unmistakable. He slights the unities superbly; has what
is, I think, the finest passage on Shakespeare written by a Frenchman up
to his day, on “The English Aeschylus;” condemns _la pernicieuse manie
de critiquer opiniâtrement_; qualifies and redeems his tendency to begin
“in the air” with “_the_ chimerical,” “_the_ marvellous,” “_the_
allegoric,” &c., by invariably condescending upon particulars in the
true critical way; and, as became the author of the _Panhypocrisiade_
and _Pinto_, defends Aristophanes against La Harpe. Unfortunately he
followed (intentionally or not) Aristotle in confining himself to Drama
and Epic. But he is a really stimulating and germinal writer, and
represents the morrow among his own contemporaries.

[Sidenote: _Feletz._]

Our last critic, before we come to those who in a way stand for both
Empires, is a curious contrast both to the critic of the type of
Geoffroy and to the critic of the type of Lemercier. Charles Marie
Dorimont, Abbé de Feletz,[235] who died in the very middle of the
nineteenth century at the age of eighty-three, was with Geoffroy
himself, Dussault, and Hoffman, one of the _Débats_ Four, and like them
was something of an anti-Romantic. But he was a man of amiable temper,
of many friends and of much addiction to society, so that he rather
flicked than lashed. His information as to the foreign subjects which he
often affected was not exhaustive, and the praise, as well as the blame,
of his not quite novel remark that in the _pièces difformes et barbares_
of Shakespeare there are _beautés veritables_, are both weakened by the
fact that he thinks Falstaff is hanged on the Stage in the _Merry
Wives_. But he reviews novels obviously by preference, can like _Joseph
Andrews_, and can enjoy Miss Edgeworth. In which things a door, great
and effectual, is opened, though Feletz doubtless knew it not.[236]

[Sidenote: _Cousin._]

Of the remarkable pair[237]—united in their lives, their careers and
their reputation—who, being first known under the first Empire, died in
the same year a little before the close of the second, Cousin concerns
us less than may be generally thought. He touched not a few literary
subjects,[238] but always preferably, and for the most part exclusively,
from the philosophical, social, or some other non-literary side.
[Sidenote: _Villemain_:] With Villemain it is different. He, too, was a
politician, a historian, and what not, but he was a man of letters, and
a man of critical letters, first of all. His second Academic prize, as a
very young man, was gained by a paper on “The Advantages and
Disadvantages of Criticism;” of the fifteen volumes of his collected
works[239] the greater part consists of literary history or estimate; he
was Professor of “Eloquence Française,” that is to say French
Literature; he was for a long period of years almost autocratic in the
distribution of prizes and promotions at the Academy, of which he was
“Secrétaire Perpetuel;” and it has long been, and to some extent still
is, the correct and orthodox thing to speak of him as having initiated
the modern critical movement in France, and shared with the Schlegels
the credit of initiating that of Europe generally.

[Sidenote: _his claims_:]

From all this men must come to the fifteen volumes with high
expectations—a little chequered perhaps in the case of the wary by some
cautions of Sainte-Beuve’s.[240] To describe the result as unmixed
disappointment would be unfair. The mere dates and contents of the books
taken together establish the fact that the debt owed by literary and
critical history to Villemain is great, and one of those which will
never be written off the _grand livre_ of the subject. That between
1816, the year of his appointment as Professor, and 1828, that of the
first publication of his _Cours de la Littérature Française_, French
students first, and then French readers, had presented to them for the
first time a survey of their literature, which included a historical
view of its own origins and earlier achievements, and something like a
comparative view of the achievements of other nations, is a thing the
greatness of which is not likely to be denied or minimised here.
Villemain’s style is always correct and agreeable, and he did much to
establish, for French criticism in the nineteenth-century, that repute
for “honeying the cup,” which has become something of a superstition.
Sainte-Beuve, in the passage just referred to, may give him a little too
much credit for acuteness and wit in his individual observations, but he
has both.

[Sidenote: _Deductions to be made from them._]

Unluckily, however, the entries on the other side of the sheet are
numerous and grave. There is not merely the fault, which his great
successor justly brings against him—a fault from which, by the way,
Sainte-Beuve himself was by no means free—that Villemain is afraid of
_concluding_, that he seldom or never gives you a clear, “grasped,”
summed-up view of his whole subject or man. Very few critics do. But in
details also his work is too often unsatisfactory. His numerous
“Reports” on academic competitions, which give opportunity for excellent
criticism, are elegant, but hollow and rhetorical, as is his rather
famous _Tableau de l’Eloquence Chrétienne au IVème Siècle_. His notices
of various ancient and modern writers are much boiled down from others,
with the result, not usual in physical boiling-down, of being not thick
but thin—those of Lucretius, and of the tempting and almost virgin
subject of the Greek Romances, especially so. Comparative and liberal as
he is, his judgment of Shakespeare will not stand beside Lemercier’s (he
says definitely that Shakespeare does _not_ provide, in the same
proportion as the Greeks, “universal beauties”), and his estimate of
Milton is beggarly beside Chateaubriand’s. With all his reputation for
rehabilitating mediæval literature, he seems to have known it little: he
is not merely very superficial on Chaucer, which might be pardonable in
a Frenchman, but actually sweeps the mighty volume of the _Chansons de
geste_ away at one stroke by the words “we had no poetry at once rude
and vigorous.” He is sound upon _Ossian_—that craze was dying and could
survive even rudimentary comparative study of literature in no one of
talent; and his thirty-ninth and fortieth lectures in the _Cours_ on
Criticism itself deserve to be very well spoken of. But on the whole he
is disappointing. We must, of course, make allowance—very large
allowance—for a pioneer who begins early, who finds others, during the
course of his long life, extending his own explorations far beyond his
own limits, and who, from other engagements, from routine, or from sheer
disenchantment or worse, declines to follow them; we must increase it
for his industry in other matters; we must give him his just part and
royalty in the accomplishment of those who followed, and not a few of
whom he actually taught, while all owed him something indirectly. But
intrinsically and absolutely I do not find him a very great or even a
very good critic. He is deficient in enthusiasm, in originality, in
grasp: nor does he quite make up the deficiency by erudition and method.

[Sidenote: _Beyle._]

Two remarkable persons, one standing apart a little—as he, like his
disciple Mérimée, always and in all things did—the other a polyhistoric
talent just short of genius, have yet to be mentioned: and these are
Henri Beyle and Charles Nodier. Beyle was, in a sense, nothing if not
critical; and the spirit of criticism pervades all his work, both the
earlier and better known novels and nondescripts, and the posthumous
volumes (deserving very much the same alliteration), which have more
recently been made known by the devoted labours of M. Stryienski. But
the “place” for his literary criticism is, of course, _Racine et
Shakespeare_, published in 1822, ere yet the Romantic party (to which
Beyle himself never belonged) was fully formed, but when the principles
“atmosphered” by Diderot, and held in various ways and degrees from
Chateaubriand and Madame de Stael onward, had already begun to influence
Frenchmen at large.

[Sidenote: _Racine et Shakespeare._]

The book itself[241] is a very curious one. Originally making its bow as
a couple of review articles, it received all sorts of accretions,
internal and appended, and, in its latest form especially, is something
of a _potpourri_. The title so far applies to the whole that the author
is generally supporting the _methods_ of Shakespeare against the
_methods_ of Racine: but a very small portion of the book is directly
occupied with either. And an unwary reader, expecting to find a
straightforward and consistent Romantic propaganda, may be almost
hopelessly puzzled, not merely by Beyle’s zigzag digressions striking in
all directions like forked lightning, but by such things as his constant
and sustained polemic against Molière, who has generally been the one
writer of the _grand siècle_ (or with Corneille one of the two writers)
taken under Romantic protection. In fact no book can better illustrate
the confusion and yeastiness of thought in that early Romantic period,
and the unconquerable, even when perverse, idiosyncrasy and
individuality of Beyle himself. Much of the piece is an attack upon
verse-tragedy _as_ verse, for here, as elsewhere, this partisan of the
greatest of all poets distinctly frowns on poetry as such. He bases
himself on Scott almost as much as on Shakespeare, yet he is terribly
disturbed by Sir Walter’s politics, and recurs again and again, more in
sorrow than in anger, but with singular lack of humour,[242] to the
story of the glass that George IV. drank out of, and that Scott first
pocketed and then sat upon. Politics, indeed, run very high throughout,
and one is never quite sure that Beyle’s dislike of Racine and Molière
is not mainly (he would himself admit it as partly) based on dislike of
an absolute monarchy and a courtly state of society. Here he divagates
into a long controversy with the unfortunate _perruque_ Auger: elsewhere
into an almost totally irrelevant excursus on Lord Byron, Italy, and the
wickedness of the English aristocracy. Yet he cannot help being
critically valuable almost everywhere, and he generally “says true
things,” though he constantly “calls them by wrong names.” How forcible
and original is the definition of Scott’s[243] form of novel as “a
romantic tragedy [or, we may add, ‘a romantic comedy’], with long
inserted descriptions.” His battle[244] early in the piece with a
“Classic” on the dramatic _illusion parfaite_ and _illusion imparfaite_,
is conducted in a masterly and victorious manner, though some of us
would like to challenge the victor to another duel, on the point whether
_theatrical_ illusion is not always, and of necessity, even less than
“imperfect,” and whether to obtain perfect “illusion” you must not
_read_ and read only.[245] Excellently acute too, for his time, though
to ours it may seem a truism, is his attribution of most critical errors
to _l’habitude choquée_:[246] and though there is both exaggeration and
undue restriction in saying that “Romanticism is the art of giving
people themselves pleasure, Classicism that of giving them what pleased
their grandfathers,”[247] we know what he means. He is very sound on
taste and fashion; and his severity on Voltaire is refreshing, because
it cannot be attributed, as it is the fashion to attribute severities on
that patriarch, to the _odium theologicum_. The whole, even in its
singularities and shortcomings, is an invaluable testimony to the set of
the current at the time:[248] but its words are not lightly to be taken
as other than “words to the wise,” and they are not invariably the words
_of_ the wise.

[Sidenote: _His attitude here_]

Beyle’s attitude in this tract has been commented on in a fashion very
illuminative (if you apply the proper checks in each case) by two
persons of unsurpassed competence, but not of quite unsurpassed
disinterestedness, Mérimée and Sainte-Beuve. The former[249] says
plumply, “Pour lui la poésie était lettre close,” and quotes the famous
_boutade_ in _De l’Amour_, that “Verse was invented as an aid to
memory.” His objection, says his disciple, to Racine (who “met with his
sovereign displeasure”) was that he had no character or local colour:
his reasons of preference for Shakespeare, that poet’s knowledge of the
human heart, the life and individuality of his characters, his command
of the nicest shades of passion and sentiment. Sainte-Beuve, on his
side,[250] affects rather to pooh-pooh the whole matter, as if it were a
battle of kites and crows, where the blood (if any) has been long
absorbed, the torn feathers blown away, and the dust settled to
quietness. Beyle was a fairly early, but excited and not quite judicious
partaker in it. He was unjust to La Harpe (Sainte-Beuve defending La
Harpe is rather good!), too much on the side of the _Edinburgh Review_
(this is better,[251] the “Blue and Yellow” as a Romantic organ!). One
remembers, of course, at once that both these great men of letters were,
if not exactly deserters and traitors in regard to Romanticism, at any
rate Romantics whose first love had grown pretty cold. Yet we must not
forget to notice that Sainte-Beuve practically confirms Mérimée on
Beyle’s “exclusion of poetry” in judging even Shakespeare.

[Sidenote: _and elsewhere._]

Nor do we need these great accuser-compurgators. The singular
self-revelations which have been communicated so lavishly of late years,
tell us, sometimes on every page, sometimes at longer, but never at very
long, intervals, of Beyle’s abiding interest in literature, and of its
curious character, Most part of the letters[252] which he, as little
more than a boy, wrote to his younger sister, Pauline, is occupied with
literary and educational advice, nearly as surprising in its meticulous
and affectionate pedagogism as the writer’s almost contemporary
_Journal_ is in very different ways. In both, and elsewhere, we find the
ever-growing passion for Shakespeare, from the dramatic and
psychological side, the ever-growing distaste for Racine, the admiration
of Corneille, and the contempt of Voltaire—the latter an excellent
subject for separate and careful study, inasmuch as we have in it
Beyle’s Romanticism engaging and overcoming his anti-religiosity. Among
the most curious documents noted here—where I think I have noted some
that are curious—is the letter to Pauline of May 12, 1807, from Berlin,
where Beyle has just discovered _Lenore_ “across the veil which covers
the genius of the German tongue from” him, and thinks it very touching.

Indeed Beyle in point of criticism is _polypidax_: though the streams
are, as it were, underground for the most part, they gush out in the
most apparently unlikely places. I have dozens of noted passages, for
instance, in that singular and most readable book the _Mémoires d’un
Touriste_,[253] certainly not a probable title-source of our matter, and
some even in the _Promenades dans Rome_. He resembled Hazlitt in the way
in which his criticism was liable to be distorted and poisoned by
extra-literary prejudice, more particularly of the anti-clerical kind. I
never knew a man so tormented with the idea of something in which he did
not—or said he did not—believe, as Beyle is with the idea of Hell. It
sometimes makes him very nearly silly, and constantly makes him lose
occasions of combined magnanimity and pure literary judgment, as
wherever he speaks of Joseph de Maistre.[254] But, as in Hazlitt’s case
also, you seldom or never find a literary judgment of Beyle’s, free from
prejudice, which is not sound.

[Sidenote: _Nodier._]

For those who like _Vitae Parallelae_, with a spice, or more than a
spice, of contrast, Nodier[255] makes an excellent pendant to Beyle: and
while his influence was much more rapid, it was wider also, if not
deeper. Nodier began his romantic and “xenomaniac” excursions with the
century, writing on Shakespeare in 1801 and on Goethe in 1802. I have
chased in the catalogues, but without bagging, a collection of early
reviews of his, published by Barginet of Grenoble in 1822, which ought
to be of very considerable interest for our purpose. It is well known
how, especially after his appointment to the librarianship of the
Arsenal in 1823, his abode became a rallying-place, and he himself a
sort of Nestor-Ulysses of Romanticism, while his delightful fantastic,
or half-fantastic stories (the best of them to my thinking is _Inès de
las Sierras_), which are Sterne _plus_ Hoffmann _plus_ something else,
form no small part of the choicest outcome of the movement. But in
criticism proper, Nodier, though a great propelling and inspiring force,
has left rather inadequate recorded examples of this force in
application. This is partly due to the fact that his intense interest in
pure bibliography, and in the “curiosities of literature,” drew him, as
similar interests have often drawn others, a little away from that
severer altar on which burns the fire of pure literary and critical
appreciation. His principal book of this kind, perhaps his principal
non-creative work, _Mélanges tirés d’une Petite Bibliothèque_,[256]
shows this very clearly: and it may rather be feared that Nodier would
have preferred a perfectly worthless book, of which he possessed an
unique copy, or an extremely eccentric one, of which hardly anybody had
ever heard, to the greatest work which everybody knew and had on their
shelves. But still he did like much of the best of what was known, and,
fortunately, directed his liking most to that of the best which was not
so well known as it ought to be. And so there are few more
characteristic names—and few names of more power—than his in the French
Transition.




                               CHAPTER V.

                     ÆSTHETICS AND THEIR INFLUENCE.

THE PRESENT CHAPTER ITSELF A KIND OF EXCURSUS—A PARABASIS ON
    “PHILOSOPHICAL” CRITICISM-MODERN ÆSTHETICS: THEIR FOUNT IN
    DESCARTES AND ITS BRANCHES-IN GERMANY: NEGATIVE AS WELL AS
    POSITIVE INDUCEMENTS-BAUMGARTEN-‘DE NONNULLIS AD POEMA
    PERTINENTIBUS’-AND ITS DEFINITION OF POETRY-THE ‘ALETHEOPHILUS’-THE
    ‘ÆSTHETICA’-SULZER-EBERHARD-FRANCE: THE PÈRE ANDRÉ, HIS ‘ESSAI SUR
    LE BEAU’-ITALY: VICO-HIS LITERARY PLACES-THE ’DE STUDIORUM
    RATIONE’-THE ’DE CONSTANTIA JURISPRUDENTIS’-THE FIRST ‘SCIENZA
    NUOVA’-THE SECOND-RATIONALE OF ALL THIS-A VERY GREAT MAN AND
    THINKER, BUT IN PURE CRITICISM AN INFLUENCE MALIGN OR
    NULL-ENGLAND-SHAFTESBURY-HUME-EXAMPLES OF HIS CRITICAL OPINIONS-HIS
    INCONSISTENCY-BURKE ON THE SUBLIME AND BEAUTIFUL-THE SCOTTISH
    ÆSTHETIC-EMPIRICS: ALISON-THE ‘ESSAY ON TASTE’-ITS CONFUSIONS-AND
    ARBITRARY ABSURDITIES-AN INTERIM CONCLUSION ON THE ÆSTHETIC MATTER.


[Sidenote: _The present chapter itself a kind of excursus._]

It was announced at the very opening of this History that it would not
deal, except incidentally and under _force majeure_, with those vaguer
problems of general Criticism or metacriticism which, during the last
two centuries, have taken the general name of Æsthetics. [Sidenote: _A
parabasis on “philosophical” criticism._] But some of my critics have
not been content with this announcement, and it is perhaps permissible
in this place to notice certain exceptions which have been taken to the
absence of—or rather to the pretty definite abstention from—
“philosophical” discussions and speculations in this book. For while in
Italy I have been pronounced _digiuno di filosofia_, the huntsmen have
been up in America against my “confusion of thought” and my writing
about Criticism without defining what criticism is.

As for the first point, I may perhaps be allowed to say that “divine
Philosophy” has been by no means such a stranger or stepmother to me as
some of my critics seem to suppose. I have duly sojourned in her courts,
and have found them the reverse of unamiable: I have eaten of her bread
and found it both palatable and nourishing. But it is Philosophy herself
who teaches us, by the mouth of not her least but, as some have thought,
her greatest exponent, not to shift or mix the Kinds. And, to my
possibly heretical judgment, the “kind” of Criticism seems one into
which such “general ideas” as my critics desiderate can only be
introduced by a most doubtful and perilous naturalisation. I suppose it
would be generally granted that no “philosophical” critics stand higher
than Plato and Coleridge: Aristotle himself has, in comparison with
them, but contented himself with middle axioms and empirical
observation. And the result of this is that—again to my possibly
heretical thinking—Plato has actually left us nothing in pure criticism
but an often mischievous theory: while Coleridge is just so much the
more barren in true criticism as he expatiates further in the regions of
sheer “philosophy.”

Nor should I, if I chose to take up the quarrel, in the least lack other
arms or armour of offence and defence, sufficiently proofmarked by
Philosophy herself. I hold that the province of Philosophy is occupied
by matters of the pure intellect: and that literary criticism is busied
with matters which, though not in the loosest meaning, are matters of
sense. I do not know—and I do not believe that any one knows, however
much he may juggle with terms—why certain words arranged in certain
order stir one like the face of the sea, or like the face of a girl,
while other arrangements leave one absolutely indifferent or excite
boredom or dislike. I know that we may generalise a little; may “push
our ignorance a little farther back”; may discover some accordances of
sound, some rhythmical adjustments, some cunning and more or less
constant appeals to eye and ear which, as we coolly say, “explain”
emotion and attraction to some extent. But _why_ these general things
delight man he knows no more than, in his more unsophisticated stage,
why their individual cases and instances do so. I do not think that my
own doctrine of the Poetic (or the literary) Moment—of the instant and
mirific “kiss of the spouse”—is so utterly “unphilosophical”: but I do
know that that doctrine, if it does not exactly laugh to scorn theories
of æsthetic, makes them merely facultative indulgences. And just as
physiology, and biology, and all the ’ologies that ever were ’ologied,
leave you utterly uninformed as to the real reason of the rapture of the
physical kiss, so I think that æsthetics do not teach the reason of the
amorous peace of the Poetic Moment.

But I began this book with no intention of writing a treatise on
_Momentary_ (or _Monochronous_) _Apolaustics_, and except that it might
have seemed discourteous to offer no explanation of (I can hardly call
this any apology for) a feature, or the lack of one, which has disturbed
well-willing readers, I should have preferred to keep such questions out
altogether. Nor can I see that there is any “confusion of thought,” any
contradiction, or even any want of “architectonic” in the plan which I
have actually pursued. A man may surely write a _History of England_
without including in it an abstract treatise on politics, and describe
an interesting country without philosophising on the architecture of its
buildings, the family story of its tribes, or the chemical constitution
of its natural products. I set before myself and my readers at the
outset the promise of a simple survey of the actual critical opinions,
actually expressed, in “judging of authors,” by the actual critics of
recorded literature. To the survey of these I have added another of the
chief reasons which they alleged for their tastes when they alleged any:
and when, as naturally happens, these opinions and tastes, and the
attempted explanations of them, appeared in groups or schools, I have
adapted my survey, by means of the Interchapters of the book, to the
summary consideration of these also. I have not thought it incumbent on
me either to express, or to refrain from expressing, agreement or
disagreement with their views: but where (as in the case of the Subject
theory, of Boileau’s Good-Sense-worship and other things) it seemed to
me that certain views and theories could be actually demolished by
argument, I have endeavoured to show how. Where it is a simple question
of taste, my own _Haupt-theorie_ forbids my attempting anything of the
sort.

I am, I confess, unable to see that either Logic or Architectonic is
outraged by this preannounced and methodical limitation of proceeding. I
have given, or attempted to give, my “Atlas” of the actual facts with
what accuracy and clearness I could. The complement of Theory I do not
pretend to supply, and I cannot see that anybody has a right to demand
it. Whoso wants to take it let him make it: my facts ought to help him
in the making, and if they do not, he and not the facts must bear the
blame. This book has attempted to provide, in an orderly arrangement,
and, as far as might be in the space, exhaustively, what has called
itself and has been called Criticism (certain varieties being, for
reasons given, excluded or less fully treated) from the beginnings of
Greek literature, as we have them, to the present day. Of these
provisions I think I may say—without prejudice to any further use of
them that any one may choose to make—_his utere mecum_: and I will just
add that had anybody offered me the same provision thirty years ago, I
should have been profoundly thankful, and have been spared many a weary
hour of gleaning here and groping there.

I shall even be so very bold as to say that what I have actually done,
or attempted to do, seems to me in the true sense both _philosophoteron_
and _spoudaioteron_ than what my censors would have liked me to do. Any
tolerably clever undergraduate, reading for Greats, could sketch (in
after-life amusing himself, and perhaps impressing others, by
accumulating arguments in support, or in destruction, of his
undergraduate hypothesis) explanations of the distaste of the ancients
for “appreciative” criticism, of the critical silence of the Middle
Ages, of the French and English attitude of sixteenth-seventeenth
century criticism and sixteenth-seventeenth century creation, of the
time of bondage to Good Sense, of the avatars and phases of Taste. I
would undertake myself to make a complete set in a Long Vacation, with
arguments _pro_ and _con_ in the “best and most orgilous” manner. But I
should not believe one of them, and I should mutter _O vix sancta
simplicitas!_ if anybody were taken in by them. In what I have given
there is no possibility of taking in, and no need to believe or
disbelieve. Here are the simple facts, disengaged by a certain amount of
hard labour from their more or less accessible sources and quarries, and
ranged, whether ill or well, yet at any rate with some system, and in
such a fashion that they must be reasonably easy to master. I may not be
an architect, but think I may claim to be a tolerable quarryman and a
purveyor of the stone in fairly convenient arrangement, workably
rough-hewed. And your most gifted architect will find himself put to it
to make his Beauvais or his Batalha, his Salisbury or his Strasburg,
from stone unquarried or unshaped to his hand. I have, in short,
endeavoured to give a tolerably complete collection of facts which have
never been collected before. If my facts are inconvenient to any
philosophy, so much the worse for it: if they are convenient, let it
take them and welcome.

At any rate—with what results of success or failure, of advantage or
disadvantage to the work, the reader, not the writer, must judge,—my
initial undertaking of abstinence has, I think, been fairly discharged.
The point, however, at which we have arrived is one of those where the
_force majeure_ makes itself felt. In the Book where we aim at
exhibiting the process of change which is so noticeable as between the
general criticism of the eighteenth and the general criticism of the
nineteenth centuries, and at examining to some extent the causes of that
change, we could not possibly omit an influence so powerful for good or
for evil as that of the constitution—as a regular branch of philosophy—
of inquiries into the principles of Beauty, into the æsthetic sense,
into the psychological aspects of the appeal of art generally. We shall
still deal in the most economical and temperate fashion with these
matters: but we cannot here abstain from them entirely. Indeed it might
be open to anybody to urge that large passages occurring elsewhere in
this volume, and even to some extent in the last, properly belong to the
present chapter—that Lessing, Diderot, Du Bos are strayed sheep of this
fold. But one remarkable person in France, another in Italy, and two
still more remarkable groups in Germany and England, will find better
place here than anywhere for something like individual notice: and
others must be at least the subject of reference and glance.

[Sidenote: _Modern Æsthetics: their fount in Descartes and its
           branches._]

With the minor differences which, occurring in all matters of opinion,
nowhere multiply so fast and subdivide themselves so minutely as in
questions of philosophy, there has been of late a general agreement to
trace the germ of the modern division of Æsthetics to Descartes.[257] To
discuss this at any length would be quite improper here: but no one who
has the least acquaintance with the Cartesian philosophy can fail to see
how naturally—nay, how inevitably—both the general principle of that
philosophy in its reduction and rallying of everything to conditions of
abstract idea and thought, and its particular insistence on clearness of
definition and the like in Method, should lead to a reconsideration and
further exploration of the idea of Beauty, literary and other. There is
also no doubt that, in the next generation or generations, the
developments of Cartesianism and the revolts against it might, nay,
must, affect powerfully these applications of abstract thought to the
remoter principles of literature. We have seen that Locke in England,
Philistine as he himself was in regard to letters, and especially to
poetry, had a very strong influence upon Addison,—an influence which he
continued to exercise, both through Addison and independently, almost
throughout the English eighteenth century. There is no doubt that in
France the Père André, whom we shall mention presently, was a direct
descendant of Descartes through Malebranche. In Italy the singular and
solitary figure of Vico, though it exercised at first no influence, has
been claimed as having a new and powerful influence to exercise in this
direction as in others. And it is not disputable that Descartes begat
Leibnitz or that Leibnitz begat Wolff, to whose philosophical system
almost all competent judgment agrees in tracing the direct origin of
German æsthetic, in Breitinger, in Baumgarten, and the rest.

[Sidenote: _In Germany: negative as well as positive inducements._]

It is, I think, Herr von Antoniewicz, the very learned and able editor
of J. E. Schlegel, who accounts[258] for the strong abstract and
æsthetic tendency of German eighteenth-century criticism, both then and
since, by the fact that the originators of it had nothing to look back
upon, nothing to “tie themselves on to,” and that they therefore struck
out into the deep, _ripæ ulterioris amore_, as we may say, to tag his
saying. This is ingenious, and it becomes more illuminative when we
compare the facts with the corresponding facts in English criticism. We,
too, though we had in Dryden and Jonson a good deal more than the
Germans had, possessed little critical starting-point. But we had, what
the Germans had not, abundance of really great writers upon whom to fix
practical and real critical examinations. It is half pathetic and half
ludicrous to see the efforts that Bodmer and Gottsched and their
contemporaries make to provide themselves with subjects of the kind out
of people like Besser and Neukirch and Amthor, like Lohenstein and
Hofmanswaldau, even like the excellent Opitz: and we cannot wonder that
they, or at least others, dropped off these unsucculent subjects into
the pure inane. But the fairer Callipolis of English criticism could
feed and grow fat on Chaucer, and Spenser, and Shakespeare, and Milton,
and Dryden always, and by degrees on all the recovered wealth of older
English literature. The Germans had nothing (save Luther and a few more
not of the absolutely first class or even a very high second) but that
mediæval literature and those ballads which naturally they did not reach
at once. And even these, much good as they did them, had not the
inestimable _alterative_ value of older as compared with newer English
literature.

[Sidenote: _Baumgarten._]

On the other hand, they had, as we have said, an unconquerable desire
and a dogged determination to learn and to improve themselves: the very
poverty of their own literature drove them to compare and abstract
others; and they possessed, in the Wolffian philosophy, a strong and
serviceable instrument of method. Breitinger, with whom we have dealt
sufficiently in his general critical aspect, may perhaps have the credit
of the first distinct and extensive attempt to busy himself with the
theory of art and letters: to Baumgarten is always attributed that of
having put the name “Æsthetic” into currency, and of having got the
thing—if it may be called a thing—into formal and regular shape. He used
the word in a thesis, _De Nonnullis ad Poema Pertinentibus_,[259] as
early as 1735, about midway between the time when the Zürich men turned
their attention seriously to poetry and imagination in the abstract, and
the issue of their main body of work in 1740-41. But it was not till
fifteen years later, at the exact middle of the century, that he began
to publish his _Æsthetica_,[260] redacted from lectures delivered in the
interval.

[Sidenote: De Nonnullis ad Poema Pertinentibus,]

The thesis itself is to the expert a sufficient announcement of the new
departure, which of course is only an old one re-fashioned. Baumgarten
takes us right back to the most abstract criticism of the Italian
Renaissance—the “idea of a poem,” the skeleton of poetic thought,
method, expression, strung together by a new science of the sense of
beauty. A poem is _oratio sensitiva perfecta_. What is poetical is that
which contributes to this perfection.

[Sidenote: _and its definition of poetry_.]

The most fatal, and I am sure the most unintentionally fatal, criticism
of Baumgarten, and incidentally of the entire division of critical or
quasi-critical literature to which his work belongs, is contained in a
remark of Herr Braitmaier’s (ii. 9) that part of the thesis “is written
with very little understanding of poetry.” The question is whether the
whole is not—whether this and other things like it might not have been
said by a man who could not distinguish between Tupper and Tennyson,
between Hugo and Delille. Look at this _oratio sensitiva perfecta_—which
sent the good Herder into ecstasies as a new poetic spell, germ, and
what not. Like other abstract definitions, including that of Coleridge
himself, to which we shall come later, it omits or misses the
_differentia_ of Poetry altogether. It lets in the prose-poetry or the
prose-better-than-poetry heretics by a wide and unclosable door:[261] it
excludes the very quality which some of those who love poetry most love
in it. What is “perfection” but the attainment, in the highest degree,
of that which is elsewhere attained in degrees high, less high, low, or
lowest? There are therefore _orationes sensitivæ_ which have the
qualities of poetry but are not poetry. This is hard to admit. Poetry
should be itself: not a “bestment” of something else.

[Sidenote: _The_ Aletheophilus.]

In the _Aletheophilus_, which followed (1741), Baumgarten expanded and,
at the same time, condescended a little. A poem is now a “lively”
oration instead of “sensitive” words, and so lively that it demands
metrical expression. Herein he seems to his severer critics to have
derogated. “Liveliness,” they say, was in _sensitiva_, only better:
“metre” was in _perfecta_ by implication. One can only say that _we_
prefer to take it explicitly. And Baumgarten, like all other theorists
with hardly an exception, grudges the admission of metre after all. He
calculates that it gives only a very small proportion of the charm of
poetry. True, the admission of it at all—with the further prescription
of “thoughts that burn,” “brilliant order,” “regular,” that is to say,
pure, neatly adjusted, adequate, and charming “expression,” does
something to dress up the bare skeleton of the _perfecta sensitiva
oratio_. But it does more to show what a bodiless skeleton it is.
[Sidenote: _The_ Æsthetica.] The _Æsthetica_ itself,[262] which had been
preceded by a sort of pilot-engine in the shape of a redaction of
Baumgarten’s professorial lectures by his pupil, G. F. Meier,[263]
expands, after a rather Vossian pattern, the principles of the two
earlier books, dwelling much on “perfection,” on the innate disposition
of the soul towards beautiful thoughts, and the like. He is perhaps most
justly thanked for his insistence on _sensitiva_—on the sensual as well
as intellectual appeal of poetry. But his illustration from actual
ancient poetry is not rich: and that from modern almost
non-existent.[264]

To Baumgarten we have given some place as to a pioneer even in a branch
of criticism which we do not intend to pursue. His followers, Sulzer and
Eberhard, must have less room, and Moses Mendelssohn, between them, is
elsewhere treated.

[Sidenote: _Sulzer._]

The well-known _Allgemeine Theorie der Schönen Künste_[265] of Sulzer,
to which the often quoted _Zusätze_ of Blankenberg belong as supplement,
is in reality a painful compound of Dictionary and Bibliography, wherein
you go from _Copiren_ to _Corinthische Ordnung_, and from _Menuet_ to
_Metalepsis_. Such things, invaluable for their time, are almost
necessarily thrown into the wallet at his back by Time himself. But they
serve as a text for a repetition of the sober truth that the immense
reputation and the really solid achievement of Germany since have been
not a little due to the provision of them by her eighteenth-century
writers. Mere knowledge will not do everything: and it is peculiarly
liable to degenerate into a simple rag-bag and marine-store accumulation
of things that are _not_ knowledge. But the average man can do very
little without it; he can sometimes do quite surprising things with it.
And while the less than average man is without it mainly negligible, it
would be wofully easy to provide examples in which persons, certainly or
possibly much above the average in ability, have made shipwreck by
neglecting it.

[Sidenote: _Eberhard._]

The _Handbuch der Æsthetik_[266] of Eberhard may deserve a line here,
because, though beginning in the orthodox æsthetic manner with general
Principles of Beauty, it works them down to specific Rhetoric and Poetry
with rather more condescension, and a great deal more ingenuity, than
usual.

[Sidenote: _France: the Père André_, his Essai sur le Beau.]

To pass to France, the _Essai sur le Beau_ of the Père André[267] is
almost a famous book, and undoubtedly exercised a great deal of
influence over the time; nor must we deny that that influence had
literary effects. But even a not hasty reader might be excused—if he
came across the book having never previously heard of it—for saying that
its connection with Literature is almost non-existent. The very word
does not occur in the Index, which is rather fuller than in most French
books of the time: and though “Eloquence” and “Poetry” do, the remarks
in reference to them are of the most meagre character. There must be
Unity: and the poet must please the imagination (Addison had at least
taught them to use the word) as well as the intellect. Even “pleasure”
is to be used with jealous care as a criterion of Beauty—the love of
this is to be “disinterested.” But beyond these vague, as one might have
thought barren, and in the last case theoretical generalities, André has
next to nothing for the student of Literary Criticism, who may make what
he can of the table of the Beautiful, as—

          Arbitrary,   Moral,       National,    Spiritual,
          Essential,   Musical,     Sensible,    Visible.

And it is well if this student has the grace to refrain from amplifying
this table after the pattern and in the spirit of the twenty-eighth
chapter of the Third Book of Rabelais.

[Sidenote: _Italy: Vico._]

In Italy, the illustrious author[268] of the _Scienza Nuova_[269] had,
before Baumgarten, before even Breitinger, and long before André, turned
the powers of his profound and original thought to the question of
_sapienza poetica_. He lays at least as much stress as Baumgarten
himself upon the _sensitiva_: discerns natural and diametrical
opposition between Metaphysics and Poetry; but still admits a Science,
“new” in this as in other respects, of Poetry, or at least a _logica
poetica_ which compares curiously with Breitinger’s “Logic of
Imagination” and other things. There does not appear to be any suspicion
or any likelihood of indebtedness: it is only one of the innumerable
instances of things being “in the air” and of the birds of the air
carrying them to different places and persons. With him, poetry, like
everything else, is an item or factor in human _history_, though,
following his strong metaphysical turn, he deals largely with the
relations to soul and sense, &c.

[Sidenote: _His literary places._]

In arranging, according to our usual fashion, the actual deliverances of
Vico as actually presented, we find them in four successive places
presenting as many stages of his thought—the _De Studiorum Ratione_
(1708), the _Constantia Jurisprudentis_ (1721), the first _Scienza_
(1725), and the second (1730).

[Sidenote: _The_ De Studiorum Ratione.]

The first named is early, and it presents the author’s thought in a
somewhat embryonic condition, but as true to the future development as
an embryo ought to be. Its importance for us consists first in the
starting[270] from Bacon, which of itself will give us something of an
inkling of Vico’s attitude to literature, though the Italian fortunately
discarded whatever was contemptuous or hostile in the Englishman’s
position. More important still is the erection[271] of a “Nova Critica”
which is opposed and preferred to “Topica” in relation to literature
itself. “Critica est ars veræ orationis; Topica [here evidently used in
one of the full senses of ‘Rhetoric’] autem copiosæ.”[272] And most, the
paragraph[273] on Poetry itself, where Vico, deserting Bacon, proclaims
it not a _vinum dæmonum_ but a “gift of the Most Highest,” declares the
great characteristic of the Poet to be Imagination, but (true to his own
line) insists on Truth being still most necessary to him. That the new
Physic will be very convenient to Poetry by supplying it with fresh and
accurate images may raise a smile: but after all it has not proved quite
vain.

[Sidenote: _The_ De Constantia Jurisprudentis.]

_De Constantia Jurisprudentis_ may seem a surprising title; but Vico was
thoroughly of the opinion of a later jurist, Mr Counsellor Paulus
Pleydell, about the necessity of “history and literature” to his
profession, and the sub-title _De Constantia Philologiæ_ takes away even
the titular shock. Philology is here no mere charwoman, with the
charwoman’s too frequent habit of doing even the mean work she does
badly; but a mighty goddess of knowledge, presiding over not merely the
history of words but the history of things. History was Vico’s real
darling: and that view of poetry as the earliest attainable history,
which, true enough in a way, was to lead him into heresy afterwards,
distinctly appears here. It is only at the twelfth chapter of this
section[274] that he comes to talk “De Linguæ Heroicæ sive de Poeseos
Origine,” and handles his subject very much as we should expect from his
text, that “Poetry is the first language of men.” Still, he goes into a
good deal of detail, and his description[275] of the iamb as the
“middleman” (_tradux_) between heroic verse and prose, though not likely
to be historically correct, has a certain truth logically. And he
appends to this, in a very long note, a discussion of Homer himself,
which is not yet polytheist.

[Sidenote: _The first_ Scienza Nuova.]

These earlier treatises take away almost all oddity from the appearance
in the first _Scienza_ of an entire Book,[276] the Third, occupied with
New Principles of Poetry. Hotch-potch as this book may seem—ranging as
it does from theogony to chronology, and from both to heraldry and the
science of medals, from elaborate discussions of “fables” generally to a
discovery of the Laws of War and Peace in poetry itself, from the
greatness of Homer to the truth of the Christian Religion,—all these
apparent oddities are waxed if not welded together by Vico’s general
idea of the Poet as the earliest and truest historian, philosopher, and
authority for the New Science of Humanity. Indeed he often reminds us of
Shelley in the _Defence of Poetry_, and I daresay Shelley really knew
him.[277]

[Sidenote: _The Second._]

It is not, however, till the second _Scienza_ that these sketches and
studies take the form of an elaborate treatise, _Della Sapienza
Poetica_, filling one whole book on the general subject, and another,
_Della Discoverta del Vero Omero_, no less than three hundred
pages.[278] Here Vico becomes more than ever “Thorough.” After
preliminaries on science generally, on poetical science, and on the
Deluge, we have a Metaphysic of Poetry, a Logic of Poetry, an Ethic,
Economic, Politic, Physic (specified down as Cosmography, Astronomy,
Chronology, and Geography)—all of Poetry!

In these bold speculations many striking and really critical sayings
occur. That it is the first principle of poetry to give life, and its
own life, to everything[279] nobody need deny; nor that poetry is at
once “impossible and credible,”[280] a near coasting of the Coleridgean
Land of Promise, the explorer starting of course, as Coleridge did, from
the Aristotelian doctrine of the “plausible impossible” and the
absurdity rendered imperceptible by poetic speech. That “too much
reflection hurts poetry”[281] is less unmixedly true, though most
certainly not unmixedly false.

[Sidenote: _Rationale of all this._]

All this is extremely interesting, but with an interest so different
from that of purely literary criticism that I can quite understand how a
man like Signor Croce, taking his start from it, ostracises purely
literary criticism itself. Of this last indeed[282] there is little or
nothing in Vico. He does not conduct—I am not aware of any one who ever
_has_ conducted—the argument for Homeric disintegration on literary
grounds: his occasional comparisons of Dante with Homer are equally
unliterary. I have not yet found a place where he deals with any author
in a purely literary spirit. The zeal of his New Science of Humanity has
eaten him up. A poem is a historical document, a poet is not merely an
early historian but an early theologian, philosopher, jurist, moralist,
panto-pragmatist, _panepistemon_, _panhistor_. Very like; but for most
of these purposes a Tupper would be quite as valuable as a Tennyson, and
we see that a cloud of unsubstantial Homerids were quite as valuable to
Vico as the One Poet of Helen and Nausicaa, of Achilles and Odysseus.

[Sidenote: _A very great man and thinker, but in pure Criticism an
           influence malign or null._]

For us, therefore, the main importance of Vico, though undoubtedly
great, is of a dubious not to say a sinister character. It establishes
him in a position by no means dissimilar to that of Plato,—a position of
enormous influence, epoch-making and original, which influence has
chiefly spent itself in ways outside of, or counter to, that which we
are pursuing. If Vico had contented himself with developing, in the
direction of literature, the theory of cyclical progression which he in
common with other great thinkers held, and if he had had literary
knowledge enough to apply it, the results might have been wholly good.
But it does not appear that he had this knowledge, and, whether he had
it or not, he used what he had in very different lines. I think that
Professor Flint has established beyond all doubt Vico’s claim to the
anticipation of the so-called “Wolfian” method with Homer.[283] But, as
I have explained from the very outset, this so-called criticism also is
not the species of criticism with which we here busy ourselves at all:
and its methods are entirely separate and partly hostile. Yet there is
no question about the importance which this so-called criticism has
assumed in the last two centuries, and in this, as in other matters,
Vico is an origin.

So is he, I think, likewise in the extension of literary criticism by
including in it investigations into psychology, not merely individual
but national, into manners, religion, and what not. This extension,
continued by the Germans of the later eighteenth century and immensely
popularised and developed during the nineteenth, of course now seems to
some the orthodox and only legitimate process of the kind. To me, as my
readers by this time must be well aware, it does not seem so. I
therefore deplore the exercise of Vico’s genius in this direction, and I
do not purpose to admit its results into these pages more than I can
help. But once more I recognise his greatness, if in some respects as
that of a great heresiarch. And it would be really “unphilosophical” to
leave him without pointing out, what has not, so far as I know, been
pointed out before, how noteworthy he is as exemplifying the corruption
of a thing accompanying quite early stages of its growth. We have
throughout maintained that the Historical method is the salvation of
Criticism, and in this very period we are witnessing its late
application to that purpose. Vico is the very apostle, nay, more, the
prophet, of the Historical method itself. Yet here, as elsewhere, the
postern to Hell is hard by the gateway of the Celestial City.

[Sidenote: _England._]

We may give a somewhat full account of some English writers whose
criticism trembles on the verge of æsthetic or oversteps it, partly on
the general principles announced in the preface to the last volume,
partly because some of them at least do touch actual criticism rather
more nearly than, say, Baumgarten and Vico; but also because, in the
great _prepollence_ of English literature during the eighteenth century,
some of them likewise—notably Shaftesbury and Burke—exercised a very
considerable influence upon foreign countries. As for Hume, he is a
particularly interesting example of a man pushing freedom of thought to
the utmost limit in certain directions, but apparently content to dwell
in the most hide-bound orthodoxy of his time as to others.[284]

[Sidenote: _Shaftesbury._]

There are few writers of whom more different opinions have been held, in
regard to their philosophical and literary value, than is the case with
Shaftesbury. His criticism has been less discussed, except from the
purely philosophical or at any rate the technically æsthetic side; but
difference is scarcely less certain here when discussion does take
place. It is difficult to put the dependence of that difference in an
uncontentious and non-question-begging manner, because it concerns a
fundamental antinomy of the fashion in which this curious author strikes
opposite temperaments. To some, every utterance of his seems to carry
with it in an undertone something of this sort: “I am not merely a
Person of Quality, and a very fine gentleman, but also, look you, a
philosopher of the greatest depth, though of the most elegant exterior,
and a writer of consummate originality and _agudeza_. If you are
sensible people you will pay me the utmost respect; but alas! there are
so many vulgar and insensible people about, that very likely you will
not.” Now this kind of “air” abundantly fascinates some readers, and
intrigues others; while, to yet others again, it seems the affectation,
most probably of a charlatan, certainly of an intellectual coxcomb, and
they are offended accordingly. It is probably unjust (though there is
weighty authority for it) to regard Shaftesbury as a charlatan; but he
will hardly, except by the fascination aforesaid or by some illegitimate
partisanship of religious or philosophical view, escape the charge of
being a coxcomb; and his coxcombry appears nowhere more than in his
dealings with criticism.[285] From the strictest point of view of our
own definition of the art, he would have very little right to entrance
here at all, and would have to be pretty unceremoniously treated if he
were allowed to take his trial. His concrete critical utterances—his
actual appreciations—are almost Rymerical; with a modish
superciliousness substituted for pedantic scurrility. “The British
Muses,” quoth my lord, in his _Advice to an Author_,[286] “may well lie
abject and obscure, especially being as yet in their mere infant state.
They have scarce hitherto arrived to anything of stateliness or person,”
and he continues in the usual style with “wretched pun and quibble,”
“false sublime,” “Gothick mode of poetry,” “horrid discord of jingling
rhyme,” &c. He speaks of “that noble satirist Boileau” as “raised from
the plain model of the ancients.” Neither family affection, nor even
family pride, could have induced him to speak as he speaks of
Dryden,[287] if he had had any real literary taste. His sneers at
Universities,[288] at “pedantick learning,” at “the mean fellowship of
bearded boys,” deprive him of the one saving grace which Neo-classicism
could generally claim. “Had I been a Spanish Cervantes, and with success
equal to that comick author had destroyed the reigning taste of Gothick
or Moorish Chivalry, I could afterwards contentedly have seen my
burlesque itself despised and set aside.”[289] Perhaps there is not a
more unhappily selected single epithet in the whole range of criticism
than “the _cold_ Lucretius.”[290]

On the other hand, both in the more speciously literary parts of his
desultory discourses _de quodam Ashleio_, and outside of them, he has
frequent remarks on the Kinds;[291] he is quite copious on
Correctness;[292] and there can be no doubt that he deserves his place
in this chapter by the fashion in which he endeavours to utilise his
favourite _pulchrum_ and _honestum_ in reference to Criticism, of which
he is a declared and (as far as his inveterate affectation and mannerism
will let him) an ingenious defender. The main _locus_ for this is the
Third Miscellany, and its central, or rather culminating, passage[293]
occurs in the second chapter thereof. The Beautiful is the principle of
Literature as well as of Virtue; the sense whereby it is apprehended is
Good Taste; the manner of attaining this taste is by a gradual rejection
of the excessive, the extravagant, the vulgar.[294] A vague enough
gospel, and not over well justified by the fruits of actual appreciation
quoted above;[295] but not perhaps much vaguer, or possessing less
justification, than most metacritic.

[Sidenote: _Hume._]

The position of Hume in regard to literary criticism has an interest
which would be almost peculiar if it were not for something of a
parallel in Voltaire. If the literary opinions of the author of the
_Enquiry into Human Nature_ stood alone they would be almost negligible;
and if he had worked them into an elaborate treatise, like that of his
clansman Kames, this would probably, if remembered at all, be remembered
as a kind of “awful example.” In their context and from their author,
however, we cannot quite “regard and pass” Hume’s critical observations
as their intrinsic merit may seem to suggest that we should do: nay, in
that context and from that author, they constitute a really valuable
document in more than one relation.

[Sidenote: _Examples of his critical opinions._]

It cannot be said that Hume does not invite notice as a critic; on the
contrary, his title of “_Essays: Moral, Political,_[296] and Literary”
seems positively to challenge it. Yet his actual literary utterances are
rather few, and would be almost unimportant but for the considerations
just put. He tells us criticism is difficult;[297] he applies[297] (as
Johnson did somewhat differently) Fontenelle’s remark about “telling the
hours”; he illustrates from Holland the difference of excellence in
commerce and in literature.[298] He condemns—beforehand, and with the
vigour and acuteness which we should expect from him—the idea of
attempting to account for the existence of a particular poet at a
particular time and in a particular place.[299] He is shocked at the
vanity, at the rudeness, and at the loose language of the ancients.[300]
He approaches, as Tassoni[301] and Perrault[302] had approached, one of
the grand _cruces_ of the whole matter by making his Sceptic urge that
“_beauty_ and worth are merely of a relative nature, and consist of an
agreeable sentiment produced by an object on a particular mind”;[303]
but he makes no detailed use or application whatever of this as regards
literature. His Essay on _Simplicity and Refinement in Writing_[304] is
psychology rather than criticism, and he uses his terms in a rather
curious manner. At least, I myself find it difficult to draw up any
definitions of these qualities which will make Pope the _ne plus ultra_
of justifiable Refinement, and Lucretius that of Simplicity; Virgil and
Racine the examples of the happy mean in both; Corneille and Congreve
excessive in Refinement, and Sophocles and Terence excessive in
Simplicity.[305] The whole is, however, a good rationalising of the
“classical” principle; and is especially interesting as noticing, with
slight reproof, a tendency to too great “affectation and conceit” both
in France and England—faults for which _we_ certainly should not indict
the mid-eighteenth century. The Essay _On Tragedy_ is more purely
psychological still. And though _On the Standard of Taste_ is less open
to this objection, one cannot but see that it is Human Nature, and not
Humane Letters, in which Hume is really interesting himself. The vulgar
censure on the reference to Bunyan[306] is probably excessive; for it is
at least not improbable that Hume had never read a line of _The
Pilgrim’s Progress_, and was merely using the tinker’s name as a kind of
type-counter. But this very acceptance of a conventional judgment—
acceptance constantly repeated throughout the Essay—is almost startling
in context with the _alleszermalmend_ tendency of some of its
principles. A critic who says[307] that “It is evident that none of the
rules of composition are fixed by reasonings _a priori_,” is in fact
saying “Take away that bauble!” in regard to Neo-classicism altogether;
and though in the very same page Hume repeats the orthodox cavils at
Ariosto, while admitting his charm on the next, having thus set up the
idol again, he proceeds once more to lop it of hands and feet and tumble
it off its throne by saying that “if things are found to please, they
cannot be faults; let the pleasure which they produce be ever so
unexpected and unaccountable.” The most dishevelled of Romantics, in the
reddest of waistcoats, could say no more.

In his remarks upon the qualifications and functions of the critic,
Hume’s anthropological and psychological mastery is evident enough: but
it is at least equally evident that his actual taste in literature was
in no sense spontaneous, original, or energetic. In comparing him, say,
with Johnson it is not a little amusing to find his much greater
acquiescence in the conventional and traditional judgments. Indeed,
towards the end of his Essay[308] Hume anticipates a later
expression[309] of a perennial attitude of mind by declaring, “However I
may excuse the poet on account of the manners of his age, I never can
relish the composition,” and by complaining of the want of “humanity and
decency so conspicuous” even sometimes in Homer and the Greek tragedies.
That David, of all persons, should fail to realise—he did _not_ fail to
perceive—that the humanity of Homer _was_ human and the decency of
Sophocles _was_ decent, is indeed surprising.

[Sidenote: _His inconsistency._]

Such things might at first sight not quite dispose one to regret that,
as he himself remarks,[310] “the critics who have had some tincture of
philosophy” have been “few,” for certainly those who have had more
tincture of philosophy than Hume himself have been far fewer. But, as is
usually the case,[311] it is not the fault of philosophy at all. For
some reason, natural disposition, or want of disposition, or even that
necessity of clinging to _some_ convention which has been remarked in
Voltaire himself, evidently made Hume a mere “church-going bell”—pulled
by the established vergers, and summoning the faithful to orthodox
worship—in most of his literary utterances. Yet, as we have seen, he
could not help turning quite a different tune at times, though he
himself hardly knew it.

[Sidenote: _Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful._]

At the close of Burke’s _Essay_[312] he expressly declines “to consider
poetry as it regards the Sublime and Beautiful more at large”; but this
“more” refers to the fact that his Fifth Part had been given to the
Power of Words in exciting ideas of the kind. Most of what he says on
this head is Lockian discussion of simple and compound, abstract and
concrete, &c., and of the connection of words with images, as
illustrated by the cases—so interesting in one instance to the English,
and in the other to the whole, eighteenth century—of Blacklock the blind
poet, and Saunderson the blind mathematician. There is, however, a not
unacute contention[313] against the small critics of that and other
times, that the exact analytical composition necessary in a picture is
not necessary in a poetic image. But one may doubt whether this notion
was not connected in his own mind with the heresy of the “streaks of the
tulip.”[314] It serves him, however, as a safeguard against the mere
“imitation” theory: and it brings (or helps to bring) him very near to a
just appreciation of the marvellous power of words as words. His remarks
on the grandeur of the phrase “the Angel of the Lord” are as the shadow
of a great rock in the weary glare of the _Aufklärung_, and so are those
which follow on Milton’s “universe of Death.” Nor is it a trifling thing
that he should have discovered the fact that “very polished languages
are generally deficient in Strength.”

In the earlier part there are interesting touches, such as that of
“_degrading_” the style of the _Æneid_ into that of _The Pilgrim’s
Progress_, which, curiously enough, occurs actually in a defence of a
taste for romances of chivalry[315] and of the sea-coast of Bohemia.
Part I. sect. xv., on the effects of tragedy, is almost purely ethical.
In the parts—the best of the book—which deal directly with the title
subjects (Parts II. and III.), an excellent demonstration[316] is made
of the utter absurdity of that scheme of physical proportion which we
formerly laughed at:[317] but the application, which might seem so
tempting, to similar arbitrariness in judging of literature, is not
made. Still more remarkable is the scantiness of the section on “The
Beautiful in Sounds”[318] which should have brought the writer to our
proper subject. Yet we can hardly regret that he says so little of it
when we read that astonishing passage[319] in which the great Mr Burke
has “observed” the affections of the body by Love, and has come to the
conclusion that “the head reclines something on one side; the eyelids
are more closed than usual, and the eyes roll gently with an inclination
towards the object; the mouth is a little opened and the breath drawn
slowly with now and then a low sigh; the whole body is composed, and the
hands fall idly to the sides”—a sketch which I have always wished to
have seen carried into line by the ingenious pencil of Charles
Kirkpatrick Sharpe.[320] A companion portrait of the human frame under
the influence of poetic afflatus, in writer or in reader, would indeed
have been funny, but scarcely profitable. In fact, the most that can be
said for Burke, as for the generality of these æsthetic writers, is that
the speculations recommended and encouraged could not but break up the
mere ice of Neo-classic rule-judgment. They almost always go directly to
the effect, the result, the event, the pleasure, the trouble, the
thrill. That way perhaps lies the possibility of new error: but that way
certainly lies also the escape from old.

[Sidenote: _The Scottish æsthetic-empirics: Alison._]

The trinitarian succession of Scottish æsthetic-empirics—Gerard, Alison,
Jeffrey—could not with propriety be omitted here, but the same propriety
would be violated if great space were given to them. They connect with,
or at least touch, Burke and Smith on the one hand, Kames on the other:
but they are, if rather more literary than the first two, very much less
so than the third. All, in degrees modified perhaps chiefly by the
natural tendency to “improve upon” predecessors, are associationists:
and all display (though in somewhat decreasing measure as a result of
the time-spirit) that sometimes amusing but in the end rather tedious
tendency to substitute for actual reasoning long chains of only
plausibly connected propositions, varied by more or less ingenious
substitutions of definition and equivalence, which is characteristic of
the eighteenth century. Gerard, the earliest, is the least
important:[321] and such notice of Jeffrey as is necessary will come
best in connection with his other critical work. Alison, as the central
and most important of the three, and as representing a prevailing party
for a considerable time, may have some substantive notice here.

[Sidenote: _The_ Essay on Taste.]

The _Essay on Taste_, which was originally published in 1790, and which
was sped on its way by Jeffrey’s Review (the original form of the
reviewer’s own essay) in 1811, had reached its sixth edition in 1825,
and was still an authority, though it must by that time have begun to
seem not a little old-fashioned, to readers of Coleridge and Hazlitt. It
is rather unfortunately “dated” by its style, which—even at its original
date something of a survival—is of the old “elegant” but distinctly
artificial type of Blair: and, as has been hinted already, it abuses
that eighteenth-century weakness for substituting a “combined and
permuted” paraphrase of the proposition for an argument in favour of the
fact. There is a very fair amount of force in its associationist
considerations, though, as with all the devotees of the Association
principle down to Mill, the turning round of the key is too often taken
as equivalent to the opening of the lock. But its main faults, in more
special connection with our subject, are two. [Sidenote: _Its
confusions_] The first is a constant confusion of Beauty or Sublimity
with Interest. Alison exhausts himself in proving that the associations
of youth, affection, &c., &c., cause _love_ of the object—a truth no
doubt too often neglected by the Neo-classic tribe, but accepted and
expressed by men of intelligence, from the Lucretian _usus concinnat_
down to Maginn’s excellent “Don’t let any fool tell you that you will
get tired of your wife; you are much more likely to get quite
unreasonably fond of her.” But love and admiration, though closely
connected, are not the same thing, and love and interest are still
farther apart. Another confusion of Alison’s, very germane indeed to our
subject, is that he constantly mixes up the beauty of a thing with the
beauty of the description of it.

The most interesting point, however, about Alison is his halting between
two opinions as to certain Neo-classic idols. His individual criticisms
of literature are constantly vitiated by faults of the old
arbitrariness, especially as to what is “low.” There is an astonishing
lack of critical imagination in his objections to two Virgilian lines—

              “Adde tot egregias urbes, operumque laborem
                   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
              Septemque una sibi muro circumdedit arces”—

as “cold,” “prosaic,” “tame,” “vulgar,” and “spiritless.” As if the
image of the busy town after the country beauty were not the most poetic
of contrasts in the first: and as if the City of the Seven Hills did not
justly fire every Roman mind![322]

[Sidenote: _and arbitrary absurdities._]

These, however, might be due to “the act of God,” to sheer want of the
quality on which the essay is written. A large part of the second volume
exhibits the perils of that Castle Dangerous, the “half-way house,”
unmistakably and inexcusably. Alison is dealing with the interesting but
ticklish subject of human beauty, and, like Burke, is justly sarcastic
on the “four noses from chin to breast,” “arm and a half from this to
that” style of measurement. But he is himself still an abject victim of
the type-theory. Beauty must suit the type; and its characteristics must
have a fixed qualitative value—blue eyes being expressive of softness,
dark complexions of melancholy, and so on. But here he is comparatively
sober.[323] Later he indulges in the following: “The form of the Grecian
nose is said to be originally beautiful, ... and in many cases it is
undoubtedly so. Apply, however, this beautiful form to the countenance
of the Warrior, the Bandit, the Martyr, or to any which is meant to
express deep or powerful passion, and the most vulgar spectator would be
sensible of dissatisfaction, if not of disgust.” Let us at least be
thankful that Alison has freed us from being “the most vulgar
spectator.” Why the Warrior, why the Martyr, why the deep and powerful
man, should not have a Grecian nose I fail to conceive: but the
incompatibility of a Bandit and a straight profile lands me in
profounder abysses of perplexity. The artillery and the blue horse must
yield their pride of place: the reason in that instance is, if not
exquisite, instantly discernible. But nothing in all Neo-classic
arbitrariness from Scaliger to La Harpe seems to me to excel or equal
the Censure of the Bandit with the Grecian Nose as a monstrous Bandit, a
disgustful object, hateful not merely to the elect but to the very
vulgar.[324]

[Sidenote: _An interim conclusion on the æsthetic matter._]

Let us hear the conclusion of this whole æsthetic matter. Any man of
rather more than ordinary intelligence—perhaps any man of ordinary
intelligence merely—who has been properly educated from his youth up (as
all men who show even a promise of ordinary intelligence should have
been) in ancient and modern philosophy, who knows his Plato, his
Aristotle, and his neo-Platonists, his Scholastics, his moderns from
Bacon and Hobbes and Descartes downwards, can, if he has the will and
the opportunity, compose a theory of æsthetics. That is to say, he can,
out of the natural appetite towards poetry and literary delight which
exists in all but the lowest and most unhappy souls, and out of that
knowledge of concrete examples thereof which exists more or less in all,
excogitate general principles and hypotheses, and connect them with
immediate and particular examples, to such an extent as the Upper Powers
permit or the Lower Powers prompt. If he has at the same time—a happy
case of which the most eminent example up to the present time is
Coleridge—a concurrent impulse towards actual “literary criticism,”
towards the actual judgment of the actual concrete examples themselves,
this theory _may_ more or less help him, need at any rate do him no
great harm. _Mais celà n’est pas nécessaire_, as was said of another
matter; and there are cases, many of them in fact, where the attention
to such things has done harm.

For after all, once more Beyle, as he not seldom did, reached the
_flammantia mœnia mundi_ when he said, in the character of his “Tourist”
_eidolon_, “En fait de beau chaque homme a sa demi-aune.” Truth is not
what each man troweth: but beauty is to each man what to him seems
beautiful. You may better the seeming:—the fact is at the bottom of all
that is valuable in the endlessly not-valuable chatter about education
generally, and it excuses, to a certain extent, the regularity of
Classicism, the selfish “culture” of the Goethean ideal, the
extravagances of the ultra-Romantics. But yet

                  “A God, a God, the severance ruled,”

and you cannot bridge the gulfs that a God has set by any
philosophastering theory.[325]

Yet although all this is, according to my opinion at least, absolutely
true; although literary criticism has not much more to do with æsthetics
than architecture has to do with physics and geology—than the art of the
wine-taster or the tea-taster has to do with the study of the papillæ of
the tongue and the theory of the nervous system generally, or with the
botany of the vine and the geology of the vineyard; although, finally,
as we have seen and shall see, the most painful and earnest attention to
the science of the beautiful appears to be compatible with an almost
total indifference to concrete judgment and enjoyment of the beautiful
itself, and even with egregious misjudgment and failure to enjoy,—yet we
cannot extrude this other _scienza nuova_ altogether, if only because of
the almost inextricable entanglement of its results with those of
criticism proper. And it is more specially to be dealt with in this
particular place because, beyond all question, the direction of study to
these abstract inquiries did contribute to the freeing of criticism from
the shackles in which it had lain so long. Any new way of attention to
any subject is likely to lead to the detection of errors in the old: and
as the errors of Neo-classicism were peculiarly arbitrary and
irrational, the “high _priori_ way” did certainly give an opportunity of
discovering them from its superior height—the most superfluous groping
among preliminaries and foundations gave a chance of unearthing the
roots of falsehood. As in the old comparison Saul found a kingdom when
he sought for his father’s asses, so it was at least possible for a man,
while he was considering whether poetry is an _oratio sensitiva
perfecta_, or whether there is a separate Logic of Phantasy, to have his
eyes suddenly opened to the fact that Milton was not merely a fanatic
and fantastic, with a tendency to the disgusting, and that Shakespeare
was something more than an “abominable” mountebank.




                              CHAPTER VI.

                        THE STUDY OF LITERATURE.

BEARINGS OF THE CHAPTER—ENGLAND—THE STUDY OF SHAKESPEARE—OF SPENSER—
    CHAUCER—ELIZABETHAN MINORS—MIDDLE AND OLD ENGLISH—INFLUENCE OF
    ENGLISH ABROAD—THE STUDY OF FRENCH AT HOME AND ABROAD—OF ITALIAN—
    ESPECIALLY DANTE—OF SPANISH—ESPECIALLY CERVANTES—OF GERMAN.


[Sidenote: _Bearings of the chapter._]

Both in the last volume and in the present Book, repeated notice has
been taken of the importance, as it seems to the present writer, of the
widened and catholicised study of literature during the earlier
eighteenth century. Not a few of the persons who have had places of more
or less honour in the foregoing chapters—the twin Swiss schoolmasters,
Lessing and the Germans almost without exception, almost all the English
precursors, and some, though fewer, in other countries—have owed part of
their position here to their share in this literary “Voyage round the
World.” Some further exposition and criticism of the way in which the
exploration itself worked may be looked for in the following
Interchapter. Here we may give a little space to some such explorers
who, though scarcely worthy of a place among critics proper, did good
work in this direction, and to the main lines and subjects on and in
regard to which the explorations were conducted.

[Sidenote: _England._]

The most interesting and directly important of the great literary
countries in regard to this matter is undoubtedly England. Curiosity in
Germany was much more widespread and much more industrious;[326] but in
the first place the notable German explorers have already had their
turn, and in the second, the width too often with them turned to
indiscriminateness, and the industry to an intelligent hodman’s work.
France, by providing such pioneers as Sainte-Palaye, and by starting the
great _Histoire Littéraire_, contributed inestimably to the stimulation
and equipment of foreign students; but it was some time before this work
reacted directly on her own literature. We have spoken of Spain, where
for a time the adherents of the older literature were, like their
ancestors in the Asturias, but a handful driven to bay, instead of as in
other countries an insurrectionary multitude gaining more and more
ground; and the traditional Dante-and-Petrarch worship of Italy did at
this time little real good. Both directly and indirectly—at home and,
chiefly in the Shakespeare direction, abroad—England here deserves the
chief place.

Her exercises on the subject may be advantageously considered under
certain subject-headings: Shakespeare himself, Spenser, Chaucer, minor
writers between the Renaissance and the Restoration, Middle English, and
Anglo-Saxon. It is not necessary here to bestow special attention on
Milton-study,[327] despite its immense influence both at home and
abroad, because it was continuous. From Dryden to the present day,
Milton has always been with the guests at any feast of English
literature, sometimes, it is true, as a sort of skeleton, but much more
often as one whom all delight more or less intelligently to honour.

[Sidenote: _The study of Shakespeare._]

It is not mere fancy which has discerned a certain turning-point of
importance to literature, in the fact that between the Fourth Folio and
the first critical or quasi-critical edition (Rowe’s) there intervened
(1685-1709) not quite a full quarter of a century. The successive
editions of Rowe himself, Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton, and Johnson
not merely have a certain critical interest in themselves, not merely
illustrate the progress of criticism in a useful manner, but bring
before us, as nothing else could do, the way in which Shakespeare
himself was kept before the minds of the three generations of the
eighteenth century.[328]

[Sidenote: _Of Spenser._]

Spenser’s fortunes in this way coincided with Shakespeare’s to a degree
which cannot be quite accidental. The third folio of the _Faerie Queene_
appeared in 1679, and the first critical edition—that of Hughes—in 1715.
But the study-stage—not the theatrical, considering a list of adapters
which runs from Ravenscroft through Shadwell up to Dryden—had spared
Shakespeare the attentions of the Person of Quality.[329] Before Hughes
he had received those of Prior, a person of quality[330] much greater;
but Prior had spoilt the stanza, and had travestied the diction almost
worse than he did in the case of the _Nut-Browne Maid_. He would not
really count in this story at all if his real services in other respects
did not show that it was a case of “time and the hour,” and if his
remarks in the Preface to _Solomon_ did not show, very remarkably, a
genuine admiration of Spenser himself, and a strong dissatisfaction with
the end-stopped couplet. And so of Hughes’ edition: yet perhaps the
import of the saying may escape careless readers. At first one wonders
why a man like Prior should have taken the trouble even to spoil the
Spenserian stanza; why an editor like Hughes should have taken the much
greater trouble to edit a voluminous poet whose most ordinary words he
had to explain, whose stanza he also thought “defective,” and whose
general composition he denounced as “monstrous” and so forth; why all
the imitators[331] should have imitated what most of them at any rate
seem to have regarded as chiefly parodiable. Yet one soon perceives that
_mens agitat molem_, that the lump was leavened, that, as in one case at
any rate (Shenstone’s), is known to be the fact, “those who came to
scoff remained to pray.” They were dying of thirst, though they did not
know how near the fountain was; and though they at first mistook that
fountain and even profaned it, the healing virtues conquered them at
last.

[Sidenote: _Chaucer._]

The same coincidence does not fail wholly even with Chaucer, of whom an
edition, little altered from Speght’s, appeared in 1687, while the very
ill-inspired but still intentionally critical attempt of Urry came out
in 1721, Dryden’s wonderful modernisings again coming between. But
Chaucer was to wait for Tyrwhitt, more than fifty years later (1775)
before he met any full scholarly recognition, and this was natural
enough. There had been no real change in English prosody since Spenser,
any more than since Shakespeare: and the archaism of the former was
after all an archaism not less deliberate, though much better guided by
genius, than that of any of his eighteenth-century imitators. To the
appreciation of Chaucer’s prosody one simple but, till turned, almost
insuperable obstacle existed in the valued final _e_, while his
language, his subjects, and his thought were separated from modern
readers by the great gulf of the Renaissance,—a gulf indeed not
difficult to bridge after a fashion, but then unbridged.

[Sidenote: _Elizabethan minors._]

Invaluable as the study of Shakespeare was in itself, its value was not
limited to this direct gain. Partly to illustrate him and partly from a
natural extension, his fellow-dramatists were resorted to,—indeed Ben
Jonson and Beaumont and Fletcher had never lost hold of the acting
stage. A few of the greatest, Marlowe especially, were somewhat long in
coming to their own; but with others it was different, and the
publication of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_, at so early a date as 1744, shows
with what force the tide was setting in this direction. Reference was
made in the last volume to the very remarkable _Muses’ Library_ which
Oldys began even earlier, though he did not find encouragement enough to
go on with it,[332] and the more famous adventure of the _Reliques_ was
followed up in the latter part of the century by divers explorations of
the treasures of the past, notably that of the short-lived Headley.[335]

[Sidenote: _Middle and Old English._]

Nay, about the close of the seventeenth century and the beginning of the
eighteenth it looked as if early Middle English and Anglo-Saxon
themselves might come in for a share of attention, as a result of the
labours of such men as Hearne and Hickes. But the Jacobite antiquary was
interested mainly in the historical side of literature, and Hickes,
Wanley, and the rest were a little before their time, though that time
itself was sure to come. And before it came the all but certain
forgeries of Macpherson, the certain forgeries of Chatterton, the sham
ballads with which, after Percy’s example, Evans and others loaded their
productions of the true, all worked (bad as some of the latter might be)
for good in the direction of exciting and whetting the literary appetite
for things not according to the Gospel of Neo-Classicism.

[Sidenote: _Influence of English abroad._]

The study of English literature abroad was somewhat limited in range,
but it had an almost incalculable effect. That German criticism would
have been made anyhow is certain enough; but in actual fact it would be
impossible to find any actual influences in its making more powerful
than the influence of Milton upon the Zürichers, and the influence of
Shakespeare upon Lessing, and all men of letters after him. These two
great (if not exactly twin) brethren, from the date of their
introduction by that strongest of ushers Voltaire, exercised, as we have
seen, in France an influence constantly (at any rate in the case of
Shakespeare) increasing, though rejected again and again with horror and
contumely by those who seemed to be pillars. Of older English writers
few except Bacon and Locke had much influence abroad—and what they
exercised was not literary. But the writers of the eighteenth century
were extremely powerful. Callières very nearly lived to see the time
when France herself, forgetting all about the trinity of _nations
polies_, respectfully read, and even sedulously imitated, the people to
whom he had thoughtfully given permission to write in Latin in order
that they might have some literary chance. Nor was this a mere passing
_engouement_: nor was it limited to the great Queen Anne men, Addison,
Pope, and Swift, who were themselves (at least the first two) in many
ways germane to French taste, and had borrowed much from France.
Thomson, an innovator and sower of revolution in his own country, was
warmly welcomed in France: about Richardson the whole Continent went
mad. Sterne excited the strongest interest both in France and Germany.
The odd French taste for the lugubrious sententiousness of Young was
rather later, and so was the well-known and slightly ludicrous adoration
of _Ossian_. But throughout the century, until the French Revolution,
English literature was not merely the subject of respectful study and
imitation in Germany but of quite lively interest in France, of an
interest almost startling when it is contrasted with the supercilious
blindness (for a man who cannot use his eyes may use his eyebrows) of
the age of Boileau.[336]

[Sidenote: _The study of French at home and abroad._]

For the moment—and the fact connects itself sharply and decisively with
the delay of their critical reconstruction—the French busied themselves
less, at least in appearance, with the exhumation and investigation of
their own literature. Nowhere was more solid work really done; nowhere
were the foundations of mediæval study, in particular, laid once for all
with such admirable thoroughness. But for a long time the workers cast
their bread upon the waters: and the waters in turn cast it mostly upon
alien shores. The mighty industry of Ducange—in method and quality as
well as time of the seventeenth century, in effect scarcely to bear full
fruit till the nineteenth—had been entirely included within the
seventeenth itself. That of Sainte-Palaye, which has been alluded to,
dates from the third quarter of the eighteenth. The magnificent
_Histoire Littéraire de La France_, not finished yet, but unresting as
unhasting, was begun as early as 1733; of the Frères Parfait we have
also spoken; Barbazan’s invaluable collection of the _Fabliaux_ appeared
in 1756. But, except it may be here and there on a man of genius like
Fontenelle, those publications had no general literary effect. How
little they had may perhaps best be gauged by the fact that the
travestied and rococo _Corps d’Extraits de Romans_ of the Comte de
Tressan, published long after all of them, _had_ such an effect, and did
rather more harm than good. Still, the two giants of the French
Renaissance, earlier and later, Rabelais and Montaigne, always kept a
hold, and did for France something, though less, of the good which the
great quartette—Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, and Milton—did for
England. Ronsard, as we have seen, kept, in the worst of times, the
respect and the appreciation of men so different in date and character
as Fénelon and Marmontel: while, if the celebrated “worship of
Lubricity” had something to do with the resuscitation of others by
Prosper Marchand, &c., let this be counted for righteousness even to the
slippery goddess who has so little!

With the eternal exception of Germany, French literature during this
time was not much studied abroad in its older divisions, and had not
much assistance to offer, in the direction of which we are now speaking,
in its more modern. When a man like Sterne touched the former, it was
probably for the reasons so handsomely palliated in the last sentence of
the last paragraph: and few others touched it at all. The influence of
the modern literature of France, exaggerated as it may have been, had
yet been considerable enough to deprive it of all value as an
_alterative_ save in the cases of exceptional and outlying writers like
La Fontaine and Fontenelle, and to some extant Marivaux, the last of
whom had himself already derived much from England, if he was to give
much back to her.[337] In other parts of Europe this influence was no
doubt still very great: it conditioned, as we have seen, the powerful
action of Lessing, both in the way of attraction and in that of
repulsion. But of the persons who attracted and inspired Lessing,
Diderot, however unlike Bentham, had something of the Benthamic fate of
requiring transportation and transformation before he could be really
operative; and the gospel of Marmontel was altogether too inconsistent
and transitional to be very effective. Rousseau, of course, to mention
him yet once more, is epoch-making enough in himself. But Rousseau is,
on the purely literary side, rather an immense propelling force than an
origin: and it is not to be forgotten, though it often has been, that
the _Confessions_ and the _Rêveries_, the most important of his works as
literature, did not appear till after his death. As for _La Nouvelle
Héloïse_, it is a question whether it is nearly so much a literary
origin as _Manon Lescaut_, its elder by a generation.

[Sidenote: _Of Italian._]

The effect of Italian literature in Italy was, it has been said, not at
the time great; the contrast between the study of Shakespeare at this
time in England and the study of Dante in Italy has, I have no doubt,
defrayed the expense of many a literary-historical comparison.[338] But
Italian—though it had lost something of the prerogative importance which
it had once, and justly, and for a long time held—retained a great, and,
as regards the products of its best time, a wholly salutary, influence
over the rest of Europe. That rather treacherous turning of French
critics on their Italian masters, which Hurd so acutely noticed, had,
like other things evil, its soul of goodness in it. Ariosto, and Tasso,
and Petrarch, though not Dante, had entered so thoroughly into the
_corpus_ of European literature that they could not be driven out by any
scoffs of Boileau or scorns of Voltaire. And when people began to
examine them for themselves there was, with the different set of tide
and wind which we have seen throughout this book, a very good chance,
almost a certainty, of a healthy voyage back. There was all the more
chance of this that the strong Renaissance admixture in the authors of
the _Orlando_ and the _Gerusalemme_, the at least not strongly mediæval
character of Petrarch, made them more suitable for eighteenth-century
consumption than the pure milk of the mediæval word. The argument which
Hurd himself put about Spenser and Milton—“_These_ were no barbarians;
_these_ were men of real learning, of polished and statesman-like
society; and _they_ liked romance”—was applicable with even greater
force to the Captain of the Garfagnana and the friend of Leo X., to the
familiar (if also victim) of princes and princesses at Ferrara, and the
Laureate elect of Rome.

[Sidenote: _Especially Dante._]

There can indeed be no doubt that throughout the eighteenth century it
was from these two poets that men drew most of their ideas of Romance
itself. Dryden, on the eve of that century, betrays the fact in his own
case by his designation of our own Guenevere under her Italian name of
Ginevra. Scott, at its close and far beyond it, wide as was his
knowledge of the true and real mediæval romance itself, is still haunted
by the Italians. While as for Petrarch (to put out of question the fact
that he is of all time, if not of the highest of all time), he means the
sonnet; and the sonnet is anti-classical from centre to circumference.
Even if Dante was somewhat neglected, the fact of Gray’s attraction to
Nicholls at their first meeting, because he found that the young man
read that Florentine, is evidence for exception as well as for rule. At
any rate, a man who studied Italian, whether he were Englishman or
Frenchman, German or from Mesopotamy, might always, and must certainly
not seldom, be brought into contact with the _Commedia_. And when that
contact is established in a fitting soul, “A drear and dying sound,
Affrights the Flamens” of Neo-classicism “at their service quaint.” You
read no more in Boileau that day, nor any day thereafter by preference
and as a disciple.

[Sidenote: _Of Spanish._]

So also in Spain the home study of the home literature—though as above
noted its results were not by any means nugatory—was far inferior to the
effect of the study of that literature abroad. The general and
half-blind impulse towards collection and reproduction, however, was
especially important,—hardly even in England, putting the works of the
very greatest out of the question, did anything appear more precious
than the _Poesias Anteriores_: and Spain had, in three different
divisions and directions, inestimable and inexhaustible treasures for
the foreign student, especially for the foreign student who felt the
gall and the cramp of the classical strait-waistcoat and wished to cast
it off. The first of these in order of time was the ballad matter
provided by the _Cancioneros_. The second was the Spanish drama, and the
reflections which it had drawn from native poets and critics. The third
was the work of Cervantes and the picaresque novel.

The first of these were valuable not only as all the ballads of Europe
were valuable, not merely because of the diametrical opposition of their
tone and spirit to that of the “classical” poetry, but because of their
remarkable _differentia_ as ballads themselves. In the first place,
they[339] are the only _Southern_ ballads available,—for Italy, though
not infertile in folk-song, does not appear to have had any ballads
proper, and those of Modern Greece are of very doubtful earliness, and
were not known till long afterwards. In the second place, the
part-Oriental part-African admixture, which makes _cosas de España_ so
interesting and so powerful, appears in them to the full. And, lastly,
there is a certain _largeur_ about them—a national quality, whether
excited by conflict with Charlemagne or by conflict with the Moors,
which is lacking in all other ballads known at least to the present
writer. Even the split between North and South Britain is a case of mere
family misunderstanding, compared with the secular stand of the great
Peninsula, at bay against Christian invaders from the North and Paynim
foes in the household. And it is not unnoteworthy that, with the
exception of _Chevy Chase_, not one of the very best of ballads in
English is inspired by the quarrel of Englishman and Scot.

The influence of the Spanish drama and of the more or less conscious
fight waged in Spain itself over its principles had also, especially in
Germany, great play, and should have had greater. It reached a climax no
doubt in the somewhat capricious and ill-informed, the certainly
intemperate, will-worship of the Schlegels, which we have not yet
discussed: but as we have seen, Lessing was aware of it, and there is no
doubt that it had great effect on at least the “Sturmers-and-Drangers.”
It ought, we say, probably to have had much more influence than it
actually exercised; but with the decay of Spanish political power the
study of the Spanish language had been steadily going out in Europe,
never, as yet, to revive. The valuable and interesting Spanish critical
discussions on the subject were almost unknown; and the theatre itself
was never thoroughly studied, till the investigations of Schack, a
German, and Ticknor, an American, in the middle of the nineteenth
century. Yet it is not necessary to spend many words on showing the
immense germinal and alterative power which this study had, and in
particular the value which it possessed as seconding the influence of
the English drama, with just sufficient difference to make the seconding
a real reinforcement, and not a mere repetition of attack by the same
troops. The obsession of the sealed pattern, the illusion of the
undeviating rule, might in a Frenchman (for strongest instance) survive
the reading, or at least the hearing, of the “barbarian” Shakespeare:
but it must have been seriously shaken by such writers of a “polished”
nation as Tirso, and Lope, and Calderon, not to speak of minors like
Alarcon and Rojas.

[Sidenote: _Especially Cervantes._]

Yet there can be no doubt that the greatest debt owed by the eighteenth
century, at least, to Spanish goes to the credit of one great man in the
main, and of a compartment of literature to which that great man, though
transcending it, belonged, in the second—in other words, to Cervantes
and the Spanish novel. The “picaresque” variety of this novel had early
affected both France and England: and it had virtue enough in it to
affect successive generations, directly or indirectly, from that of
Scarron and Head, through that of Le Sage, down to that of Smollett.
Abundance of things may be said against the picaresque style: but of one
credit nobody can possibly deprive it—that it was the first kind in
Europe to combine the ordinary life of the _fabliau_ (and in part the
_novela_) with the length, the variety, the quasi-epic conformation and
powers of the Romance. And while all the best of this quality appeared
in _Don Quixote_ itself, that mighty book left out almost all the bad
and weak concomitants, and added merit and powers of which the
_Lazarillos de Tormes_ and the _Marcos de Obregon_ had not a vestige. As
we have seen, Cervantes was something of a Neo-classic himself in
critical principles, and something (though not so much as has been
thought) of an enemy of Romance in purpose. But his performance was
fatal to his teaching in more ways than one or two: while he certainly
gave Fielding the idea of the modern novel even as a matter of theory
and schedule.

[Sidenote: _Of German._]

If we say less here of Germany it is not because there is less to say,
but because, in the first place, much of it has been and much more will
be said, elsewhere; and because, in the second, we should have to give
an abstract of the German literary history of the century. It was not
till very late—till almost the eve of the nineteenth—that German
literature had much effect abroad, or indeed that there was much German
literature to have any effect. But quite early the Germans began to
study their own older writers; and early and late they, as we have seen,
simply flung themselves on the literature of other countries. It is
indeed open to any one to contend that from the first (some century and
a half ago) to the present day they overdosed themselves with this as
with other studies,—that, taking to it before Germany had really
acquired a continuous and important literary idiosyncrasy of its own,
they have always lacked the _pou sto_, and have wasted their labour in
consequence. But this is another and for us an irrelevant question. That
they form no exception to the rule illustrated in this chapter, and that
they not only took the medicine in huge doses themselves, but prepared
it and handed it on to others, as if they wished to be the literary
apothecaries of Europe, this is undeniable.[340]




                           INTERCHAPTER VII.


It becomes somewhat more difficult to twist and twine the threads of our
Interchapters as we come to the complexity and diversity of modern
times; but, in the same proportion, each web or yarn becomes more
important as link and guide-rope of the whole History.

The present period—or stage, for it has more logical than chronological
unity—may seem at first sight extremely confused; composed as it is of
constituents separated from their countrymen, their contemporaries, and
in some cases even their fellow-workers, whom we have dealt with
formerly. But these constituents have in reality the greatest of all
unities, a unity (whether conscious or unconscious does not matter a
jot) of _purpose_.

                “One port, methought, alike they sought,
                One purpose hold where’er they fare.”

The port was the Fair Haven of Romanticism, and the purpose was to
distinguish “that which is established because it is right, from that
which is right because it is established,” as Johnson himself formulates
it. And now, of course, the horse-leeches of definition will ask me to
define Romanticism, and now, also, I shall do nothing of the sort, and
borrow from the unimpeachable authority of M. Brunetière[341] my reason
for not doing it. What most of the personages of this book sought or
helped (sometimes without at all seeking) to establish is Romanticism,
and Romanticism is what they sought or helped to establish.

In negative and by contrast, as usual, there is, however, no difficulty
in arriving at a sort of jury-definition, which is perhaps a good deal
better to work to port with than the aspiring but rather untrustworthy
mast-poles of “Renascence of Wonder” and the like. We have indeed seen,
throughout the last volume, that the curse and the mischief of
Neo-classicism lay in the tyranny of the Definition itself. You had no
sooner satisfied yourself that Poetry was such and such a thing, that it
consisted of such and such narrowly delimited Kinds, that its stamped
instruments and sealed patterns were this and that, than you proceeded
to apply these propositions inquisitorially, excommunicating or
executing delinquents and nonconformists. The principal uniformity amid
the wide diversities of the new criticism was that, without any direct
concert, without any formulated anti-creed, they all tended to remove
the bolts and the bars, to antiquate the stipulations, to make the great
question of criticism not “What have you proposed to do, and how have
you proposed to do it?” but “What is this that you have _done_? and is
it good?” But they never, in any instance, formulated the abolition of
restrictions, as, for instance, we shall find Hugo doing in the Preface
to the _Orientales_. They had almost invariably some special mediate or
immediate object in view—in Hurd’s case to get rid of the
disqualification of the “Gothic,” in Lessing’s to get rid of the
domination of French. Even Diderot’s Impressionism—the most important
and pregnant phenomenon of the whole—is a matter of practice, not of
theory, of infinite local explorations, not of a Pisgah-sight. The whole
tendency, as we have indicated in the sub-title of the book, is rather
to dissolve what exists than to put anything definite in its place.

The survey of their actual accomplishment,[342] therefore, may be best
executed, for the purpose of corresponding with and continuing those
formerly given, by first considering more generally the main new
critical engines—Æsthetic inquiry and the Study of Literature—which have
formed in detail the subjects of the last two chapters; then by
summarising, as usual, the most significant performances of national
groups and individuals; and, lastly, by indicating, as best may be done,
the point to which the stage has brought us.

The advantages and importance of the wider and more abstract æsthetic
inquiry in reconstituting or reorganising criticism should be pretty
obvious. The worst fault of the later Neo-classicism, in its corruption,
was that it tended to become wholly _irrational_—a mere reference to
classification; that even its appeal to Nature, and to Reason herself,
had got utterly out of _rapport_ with real nature, with true reason. Now
the construction of a general theory of the Sublime and Beautiful—
however partial or however chimerical the inquiry into the appeals of
different arts and different divisions of the same art—could not but
tend—however indirectly, however much in some cases against the very
will of the inquiry—to unsettle, and sometimes to shatter, the
conventional hypotheses and theories. “Why?” and “Why not?” must force
themselves constantly on such an inquirer; and, as has been said more
than once or twice, “Why?” and “Why not?” are battering-rams,
predestined, automatic, irresistible, to conventional judgments of all
sorts. It was, indeed, not impossible for a person sufficiently stupid,
or sufficiently ingenious, to construct an æsthetic which, somehow or
other, should fit in with the accepted ideas.[343] But what stupid
people do does not count for much in the long-run, despite the
proverbial invincibility of stupidity for the time. And the ingenious
person, unless his perverseness were truly diabolical, must sometimes
hit upon truth which would explode all his convention.

At the same time Æsthetics have proved, and might by an observer of
sufficient detachment have from the first been seen to be likely to
prove, a very dangerous auxiliary

to Criticism, if not even a Stork for a Log. In the first place, there
was the danger—present in fact from the first, impending from before the
very first—of fresh arbitrary rules being set up in the place of the old
ones,—of the old infinitely mischievous question, “Does the poet please
_as he ought to please_?” being juggled into the place of the simple
“Does he please?” No form of abstract inquiry can escape this danger:
and that is why, save in matter of the pure intellect, abstract
inquiries should always be suspected. Form your theory and conduct your
observations of the æsthetic sense, of “the Beautiful,” of the mediate
axioms of this or that literary kind, as carefully, as impartially, with
as wide a range and view, as you may—these perilous generalisations and
abstractions will always bring you sooner or later into contact and
conflict with the royal irresponsibility, or (as some may hold it) the
anarchic individualism of the human senses, and tastes, and artistic
powers. You will hamper your feet with a network of axioms and
definitions; you will burden your back with a whole Italian-image-man’s
rack-full of types. It is somewhat improbable that you will be a
Lessing: yet even a Lessing loses himself in inquiries as to what “_a_
jealous woman’s” revenge will be, what “_an_ ambitious woman’s revenge
will be.” Shakespeare (for that Shakespeare had very much to do with the
whole portraiture of Margaret, from the first gracious and playful scene
with Suffolk to the sombre and splendid triumph over Elizabeth
Woodville, I at least have no doubt) has shown us in Margaret of Anjou
the revenge and the other passions of a woman who is at once ambitious,
jealous, the victim perhaps not of actually adulterous but certainly of
rather extra-conjugal love, yet loyal to her husband’s position if not
to himself, a tigress to her enemies and to her young alike, a rival in
varying circumstance, an almost dispassionate sibyl reflecting and
foretelling the woes of her rivals. You can no more disentangle all
these threads, and get the passion of this type and the passion of that
separate, than Psyche could have done her task without the ants. Yet,
early and crude as is the work, it is all right, it is all there. And
Æsthetics are not the ants.

A much more dangerous result of addiction to the æsthetic side of
criticism, mainly or exclusively, is that you get by degrees away from
the literary matter altogether, and resign yourself to the separation
with all the philosophy of Marryat’s captain, when he gave orders first
that he should be called when the last ship of his convoy was out of
sight behind, and then when the first hove in sight again. I remember
once hearing a lecture, and a very interesting one, on Hegel’s idea of
tragedy as illustrated in Shakespeare, delivered by a most admirable
scholar, then professor in one great University, and now professor in
one than which there is no greater. It was very ingenious, very
stimulating; but I remember thinking at the close of it that it might
have been delivered just as well if we were in such an infinite state of
misery as to have not a line of an actual tragedy of Shakespeare, but
only abstracts and arguments, as with some of the ancients. In the
attraction to the æsthetic, the moral, the dramaturgic side and the
like, an absolute break of contact with the literary may come about. We
have seen that this is the case even with Lessing, and it is constantly
the case with German critics and with their English followers. The
“word,” the “expression,” sinks out of the plane of the critic’s
purview. His Æsthetics become Anæsthetics, and benumb his literary
senses and sensibilities.

Recurrence to one example of this may suffice. When I see Lessing called
“the King of Criticism” I always think, great as is my opinion of him,
of that judgment of _Soliman the Second_. Here is a thing which, on its
own lines and specification, is, and is practically allowed by the
critic to be, a masterpiece. But he will not accept those lines. It is a
satiric criticism of life, of the actual nature, morals, _mœurs, mores,
ethe_, of men; he wants it to be a didactic exhortation to what those
morals ought (according to him) to be. He does not find Soliman’s
butterfly veerings from the sentiment of Elvire to the mere
courtesanship of Delia, and from this latter to the grisettish or
soubrettish minxery of Roxelane, attractive or excusable. He does not
like this minxishness; there are even signs that he has a private
antipathy towards the _petit nez retroussé_ which plays so great a part
in the story. His criticism is in consequence not a criticism at all; it
is a mere explosion of unreasoning dislike—at best one of “nervous
impression,” as Flaubert said to Sainte-Beuve. And if, by a juggle of
words, it be retorted that Lessing is a dogmatic not an æsthetic critic,
this retort will fall blunted from the simple rectification that he is a
dogmatist of æsthetics and an æsthetician in dogma.

The benefits, therefore, of the rise of Æsthetics as a special study
were far from unmixed, though the influence of that rise was very great.
It is otherwise with the Study of Literature, to which we have also
given a short and summary chapter above. Here it was all but impossible
that extension of consideration—from modern and classical to mediæval,
from certain arbitrarily preferred modern languages to others—should
fail to do good. Prejudice, the bane of Criticism, received, in the mere
and necessary progress of this study, a notice to quit. This notice took
various forms and was exhibited and attended to in various ways.
England, France, and Germany exhibited these differences with a
difference itself very interesting. But they can be reduced to a few
heads with very little difficulty.

The first of these is the attempt to judge the work presented, not
according to abstract rules, derived or supposed to be derived from
ancient critical authority, nor according to its agreement or
disagreement with the famous work of the past. To some extent this
revolutionary proceeding was forced upon our students by the very nature
of the case—it was one of the inevitable benefits of the extension of
study, and especially of the return to mediæval literature. To attempt
to justify that literature, as Addison, with more or less seriousness,
had done, by showing that its methods were after all not so very
different from those of Homer, or even Virgil, was in some cases flatly
impossible, in most extremely difficult; while in almost all it carried
with it a distinct suspicion of burlesque. There was no need of any
_dislike_ of the classics; but it must have been and it was felt that
mediæval and later literature must be handled _differently_.[344] And
so—insensibly no doubt

at first—there came into Criticism the sovereign and epoch-making
recognition of the “leaden rule”—of the fact that literature comes first
and criticism after—that criticism must adjust itself to literature, and
not _vice versa_. Very likely not one of the men we are here discussing
would have accepted this doctrine _simpliciter_:[345] indeed it is the
rarest thing to find it accepted even a century and a half after their
time, except in eccentric and extravagant forms. But it lay at the root
of all their practice.

Further, that practice, deprived of the crutches and go-carts of rule
and precedent, was perforce obliged to follow the natural path and play
of the feelings and faculties—to ask itself first, “Do I like this?”
then, “How do I like it?” then, “What qualities are there in it which
make me like it?” Again, these questions may not have formulated
themselves quite clearly to any of our group. Again, it would be hard to
name many critics since who have at once fearlessly and faithfully kept
them before their eyes. But, again also, these were the questions which,
however blindly and stumblingly, they followed as their guiding stars,
and these have been the real questions of criticism ever since.

Postponing the discussion of the relationship of this new criticism to
the old, we may turn to another point of its _differentia_. This is that
students of mediæval literature especially were—again perforce and
whether they would or no—driven to make excursions into the region of
Literary History, and, what is more, of Comparative Literary History.
They found themselves face to face with forms—the ballad and the romance
being the chief of them—which were either not represented at all or
represented very scantily and obscurely in classical literature, while
they had been entirely and almost pointedly neglected by classical
criticism. They could not but see that, both in mediæval literature
proper and in modern, there were other forms and subvarieties of

literature, in drama,[346] in poetry, in prose, which differed extremely
from anything in ancient letters. In examining these, with no help from
Aristotle, or Longinus, or Horace, they could not but pursue the natural
method of tracing or endeavouring to trace them to their origins, and in
so doing they could not but become conscious, not merely of the history—
so long interrupted by a mist like that of Mirza’s vision—of English or
French or whatsoever literature itself, but also more dimly of the
greater map of European literature, as it spread and branched from the
breaking up of the Roman Empire onwards. And this study of Literary
History was in the main, this study of Comparative Literary History was
almost absolutely, again a new thing.

Nor were the actual critical results which, either expressly or
incidentally, came from the exercitations of these critics of less
importance. The turn of the tide may nowhere be seen so strongly as in
Joseph Warton’s audacious question whether Pope, the god of the idolatry
of the earlier part of the century in England, was a poet, or at least a
great poet, at all; in Lessing’s proposition to call the great
Corneille, just re-habilitated as he had been by Voltaire himself,
Corneille the Monstrous. These things indeed were, like all
revolutionary manifestos, extravagances, yet the extravagance was not
only symptomatic but to a great extent healthy. It was probably
impossible as a matter of tactics—it would certainly have been unnatural
as a matter of history and human nature—to refrain from carrying the war
into the enemies’ country, from laying siege to the enemies’ stronghold.
And this was invited by the ignorant and insulting depreciation which
had long been, and long continued to be, thrown upon one of the most
charming and precious divisions of the literature and thought of the
world.

But there were more sober fruits of the revolt. Hurd might

indeed have developed further that doctrine of Romantic as independent
of Classical Unity, which is one of the most important discoveries or at
least pronouncements of any time, which practically established a _modus
vivendi_ between all rational Neo-classic and all rational Romantic
criticism, and which has never yet been worked out as it deserves.
Percy’s _Essay on Alliterative Metre_, despite the comparative
narrowness of its basis, is both acute and successful; and falls in
interestingly with that more intelligent devotion to Prosody which has
up to the present time given better results than any “metacritic,” and
has plenty yet to give. Thomas Warton, though often a fanciful and
sometimes an insufficiently equipped critic, was a critic both alert and
sound. Diderot might with advantage have concentrated that “encyclopædic
head” of his on fewer subjects, have been less anarchic, more subject to
harmless convention. But there are few better examples in literature of
the “strong young devil shut up in an iron box” and made to do work—as
the Bulgarian peasant defined the locomotive to an English engineer who
went to the Balkans after the war of 1878. We have not feared to speak
of Lessing’s shortcomings, but though it is possible to speak
indiscreetly and unadvisedly of his merits in kind and point, who shall
overpraise them in degree? And the bent of almost all of them turned,
and turned most beneficially, especially in the case of Warton, to
History.

The necessary retrospect of the achievement of groups and countries can
be given at no excessive length. The Germans had begun criticism later
than any other of the great nations; and they had hardly passed the mere
“rhetoric” stage of it when France was leading Europe in the later
Neo-classic phase; when England was already, under the half-unknowing
leadership of Dryden, sighting the modern conditions; and when Italy and
Spain were passing into a sort of temporary dotage or trance on the
subject. But during the seventeenth century the influence of England had
been exchanged for that of France, and this latter, itself originally
recommended by Opitz with a view to the exhibition of Pléiade medicine,
had got this prescription changed, by a sort of legerdemain of Time the
Conjurer, for the very different one of Correctness _à la_ Boileau. Yet
the doses of Ronsardism had had great effect already, and the strong
romantic leaven in the Germans, their pupillary state, their
philosophical leanings—above all, that restless, irresistible, unwearied
craving for knowledge which characterised them—prevented them from
abiding in the faith of Gottsched for any length of time. We have traced
the gropings and tentatives, the successive stages of Bodmer and those
about him, the arrested promise of J. E. Schlegel, that Marcellus of
German criticism, and we saw how _Enfin Lessing vint_.

There can, for once, be no harm in attributing part at least of the
deserved prominence of this critic in German criticism to the fact that
he not only exhibited eminently the two great characteristics of his
countrymen in the department,—unwearied industry in study and
philosophic disposition of his results,—but combined with this
exhibition merits which they much more rarely possess—an intimate though
irregular appreciation, a great intellectual alacrity, and, above all, a
really good and pleasant style. He did not, unfortunately, help to
propagate these latter qualities so much as he helped to establish and
corroborate the former: but with the limitations noted above, he did a
great deal in almost all ways. The opinion which assigns to him,
everywhere in literature more or less, but in criticism most of all, the
principal share in that enormous dead-lift of German letters which marks
the middle of the eighteenth century, and which, _exceptis excipiendis_,
may be said to have made Goethe and Schiller possible, is unquestionably
right. And though he did not quite live to see the time when Germany had
begun to repay the enormous debts which, before his lifetime and during
its earlier part, she had accumulated towards the rest of Europe, he
almost saw this: and he had almost more to do than any other with the
counter-accumulation of the necessary funds.

Yet he himself was, as we have seen, a debtor: and to the old creditor,
France. The critical history, during this period, of France herself is
the most curious of the three divisions which here suffice. In Germany,
Neo-classicism, which had taken no deep root, was easily uprooted. In
England, though various causes, and especially the immense influence of
the “dead hand” of Addison and Pope, and the living one of Johnson, kept
back the Romantic growth in a salutary fashion, that growth itself was
as steady as it was slow. In the very year after Gray died, Coleridge
was born: and the lives and work of these two men mark one unhasting,
unresting line of Romantic progress. But in France (as the two parallel
views given in the second chapter of the last book, and the fourth
chapter of this, will have shown), although there is no real confusion,
the strands are most puzzlingly twisted during the whole of this
selfsame period, till those of the classical colour break and ravel away
into almost nothing just before the close. This is due, no doubt, in
part to the extreme strength of what we may call the Neo-classic
_establishment_ in France—to the fact that the strong places of
literature are held by classical garrisons, who take good care to let no
unorthodox recruit set foot in them if it can possibly be helped. But it
is due also to that essential classicality which has been noticed, and
fully acknowledged, in the French literary temper. It certainly exists:
and it accounts not merely for the stubborn resistance, until its sudden
_débâcle_, of Classicism itself, but also for the peculiarities of the
various greater critics whom we have noticed.

Of the three greatest of these (for Madame de Staël cannot, I think,
really make out her right to cut in) Joubert excels in aphoristic and
perennial quality, somewhat (not wholly) independent of time, and
Chateaubriand expresses more fully than any one the tendencies (even in
him much chequered by others) which he was to live to see triumphant
without being quite glad thereat. But Diderot is, in principle and
motive force, however eccentrically working, if not in actual expressed
example, the most considerable of the three, and perhaps the most
considerable single figure included in this Book. For in him, as was
said above, we first see as a pervading and guiding, if not explicitly
asserted, principle that Impressionism which (though the word has been
variously used[347]) is, in its simplest and most natural meaning,
perhaps more

appropriate to “Modern” criticism than any other single term. As we have
seen and put from many different sides, the general tendency of ancient
and of Neo-classic critics was always to separate the work as much as
possible from the worker, and (except as regarded oratory and partly
drama) still more from the hearer and reader—this being done for the
freedom of considering it, not so much in and by itself, as in relation
to ideal and _a priori_ schedules of its kind, quality, and appurtenant
rules. There had been partial and half-conscious revolts or declensions
from this in individuals, from Longinus to Castelvetro, and from
Castelvetro to Fontenelle. But Diderot is almost the first person who
habitually, naturally, as a matter of course, isolates the work _with
himself_, considers it in its form and pressure as printed on _him_. And
this is almost, or altogether, a new Covenant of Criticism.

The performance of England here was not so fruitful of great critical
personalities—for her greatest, Johnson, was in intention, though by no
means wholly in performance, on the other side. Nor, though the English
Æsthetics were influential abroad as well as at home, can they be ranked
very high. In the other chief branch, however, of that practical
operation which has been noticed, the rediscovery and revaluation of the
capital of the literature for critical purposes, England takes the most
important position of all—less by the excellence of the workers (though
this was not inconsiderable) than in consequence of the richness of
their material. The French, except from the antiquarian side, were still
neglecting, and even for the most part despising, their own old
treasures, which were themselves scarcely so great as those of England:
and the Germans, though not neglectful of what they had, had less, and
dealt with it in a less thoroughly literary spirit. But Gray, Percy,
Hurd, the Wartons (especially Thomas), and all the painful and
meritorious editors from Theobald to Tyrwhitt, were engaged,
independently in intention, but in fact systematically enough, not
merely in clearing away rubbish and bringing treasures to light, but in
combating the prejudices and doing away with the delusions and
ignorances which had led to the neglect and contempt of those treasures
themselves.

Even those other nations which directly contributed little or
nothing[348] to criticism during the time, contributed, as we have seen,
something also under this head by examination of their own literatures,
and something more by their adoption and following of English, or of
French, or (towards the end) of German also. Towards any wide
comparative study of literature, indeed, this period made but a far-off
approach: that could not come till later, though it is the glory of
Germany, in the second division of the time, with which we shall deal
presently, to have begun the attack itself, and made it something more.
But the study of the individual literature at different periods has very
much the same kind of widening and altering power as the study of
different literatures, and this at least was vigorously pursued.

For after all it is History which is at the root of the critical—as of
almost every other—matter. To judge you must know,—must know not merely
the so-called best that has been thought and done and written (for how
are you to know the best till you know the rest?), but to know all, or
something of all, that has been written, and done, and thought by the
undulating and diverse animal called Man. His undulation and his
diversity will play you tricks still, know you never so widely; but the
margin of error will be narrower, the more widely you know. The most
perfect critical work that we have—that of Aristotle and that of
Longinus—is due in its goodness to the thoroughness of the writers’
knowledge of what was open to them, in its occasional badness and lack
of perfection to the fact that everything was not open to them to know.
“The goodness of _our_ goodness when we’re good” is due to our knowing a
little more, and the more frequent badness of our badness when we are
bad to our not taking the trouble to know it thoroughly.

                               BOOK VIII

                    THE RECONSTRUCTION OF CRITICISM

  “_To the young I would remark that it is always unwise to judge of
  anything by its defects; the first attempt ought to be to discover its
  excellences._”—COLERIDGE.

  “_Il ne savait pas de quoi étaient faites les_ limites de l’art.”—
  VICTOR HUGO.

  “_Savoir bien lire un livre en le jugeant chemin faisant, et sans
  cesser de le goûter, c’est presque tout l’art du critique._”—
  SAINTE-BEUVE.




                               CHAPTER I.

      WORDSWORTH AND COLERIDGE: THEIR COMPANIONS AND ADVERSARIES.

WORDSWORTH AND COLERIDGE—THE FORMER’S PREFACES—THAT TO ‘LYRICAL
    BALLADS,’ 1800—ITS HISTORY—THE ARGUMENT AGAINST POETIC DICTION, AND
    EVEN AGAINST METRE—THE APPENDIX: POETIC DICTION AGAIN—THE MINOR
    CRITICAL PAPERS—COLERIDGE’S EXAMINATION OF WORDSWORTH’S VIEWS—HIS
    CRITICAL QUALIFICATIONS—UNUSUAL INTEGRITY OF HIS CRITIQUE—ANALYSIS
    OF IT—THE “SUSPENSION OF DISBELIEF”—ATTITUDE TO METRE—EXCURSUS ON
    SHAKESPEARE’S ‘POEMS’—CHALLENGES WORDSWORTH ON “REAL” AND “RUSTIC”
    LIFE—“PROSE” DICTION AND METRE AGAIN—CONDEMNATION IN FORM OF
    WORDSWORTH’S THEORY—THE ‘ARGUMENTUM AD GULIELMUM’—THE STUDY OF HIS
    POETRY—HIGH MERITS OF THE EXAMINATION—WORDSWORTH A REBEL TO LONGINUS
    AND DANTE—THE ‘PREFACE’ COMPARED MORE SPECIALLY WITH THE ‘DE
    VULGARI,’ AND DANTE’S PRACTICE WITH WORDSWORTH’S—THE COMPARISON
    FATAL TO WORDSWORTH AS A CRITIC—OTHER CRITICAL PLACES IN COLERIDGE—
    THE REST OF THE ‘BIOGRAPHIA’—‘THE FRIEND’—‘AIDS TO REFLECTION,’
    ETC.—THE ‘LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE,’ ETC.—THEIR CHAOTIC CHARACTER AND
    PRECIOUSNESS—SOME NOTEWORTHY THINGS IN THEM: GENERAL AND PARTICULAR—
    COLERIDGE ON OTHER DRAMATISTS—THE ‘TABLE TALK’—THE ‘MISCELLANIES’—
    THE LECTURE ‘ON STYLE’—THE ‘ANIMA POETÆ’—THE ‘LETTERS’—THE
    COLERIDGEAN POSITION AND QUALITY—HE INTRODUCES ONCE FOR ALL THE
    CRITERION OF IMAGINATION, REALISING AND DISREALISING—THE
    “COMPANIONS”—SOUTHEY—GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF HIS CRITICISM—
    REVIEWS—‘THE DOCTOR’—ALTOGETHER SOMEWHAT “IMPAR SIBI”—LAMB—HIS
    “OCCULTISM” AND ALLEGED INCONSTANCY—THE EARLY ‘LETTERS’—THE
    ‘SPECIMENS’—THE GARRICK PLAY NOTES—MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS—‘ELLA’—THE
    LATER ‘LETTERS’—UNIQUENESS OF LAMB’S CRITICAL STYLE AND THOUGHT—
    LEIGH HUNT: HIS SOMEWHAT INFERIOR POSITION—REASONS FOR IT—HIS
    ATTITUDE TO DANTE—EXAMPLES FROM ‘IMAGINATION AND FANCY’—HAZLITT—
    METHODOF DEALING WITH HIM—HIS SURFACE AND OCCASIONAL FAULTS:
    IMPERFECT KNOWLEDGE AND METHOD—EXTRA-LITERARY PREJUDICE—HIS RADICAL
    AND USUAL EXCELLENCE—‘THE ENGLISH POETS’—THE ‘COMIC WRITERS’—‘THE
    AGE OF ELIZABETH’—‘CHARACTERS OF SHAKESPEARE’—‘THE PLAIN SPEAKER’—
    ‘THE ROUND TABLE,’ ETC.—‘THE SPIRIT OF THE AGE’—‘SKETCHES AND
    ESSAYS’—‘WINTERSLOW’—HAZLITT’S CRITICAL VIRTUE, IN SET PIECES, AND
    UNIVERSALLY—BLAKE—HIS CRITICAL POSITION AND DICTA—THE “NOTES ON
    REYNOLDS” AND WORDSWORTH—COMMANDING POSITION OF THESE—SIR WALTER
    SCOTT COMMONLY UNDERVALUED AS A CRITIC—INJUSTICE OF THIS—CAMPBELL:
    HIS ‘LECTURES ON POETRY’—HIS ‘SPECIMENS’—SHELLEY: HIS ‘DEFENCE OF
    POETRY’—LANDOR—HIS LACK OF JUDICIAL QUALITY—IN REGULAR CRITICISM—THE
    CONVERSATIONS—‘LOCULUS AUREOLUS’—BUT AGAIN DISAPPOINTING—THE REVIVAL
    OF THE POPE QUARRELS—BOWLES—BYRON—THE ‘LETTER TO MURRAY,’ ETC.—
    OTHERS: ISAAC DISRAELI—SIR EGERTON BRYDGES—‘THE RETROSPECTIVE
    REVIEW’—THE ‘BAVIAD’ AND ‘ANTI-JACOBIN,’ WITH WOLCOT AND MATHIAS—THE
    INFLUENCE OF THE NEW ‘REVIEWS,’ ETC.—JEFFREY—HIS LOSS OF PLACE AND
    ITS CAUSE—HIS INCONSISTENCY—HIS CRITICISM ON MADAME DE STAËL—ITS
    LESSON—HALLAM—HIS ACHIEVEMENT—ITS MERITS AND DEFECTS—IN GENERAL
    DISTRIBUTION AND TREATMENT—IN SOME PARTICULAR INSTANCES—HIS CENTRAL
    WEAKNESS, AND THE VALUE LEFT BY IT.


[Sidenote: _Wordsworth and Coleridge._]

There are many differences, real and imaginary, partial and general,
parallel and cross, between ancient, and mediæval, and modern poetry;
but there is one, very striking, of a kind which specially
differentiates ancient and mediæval (except Dante) from modern. In the
former class of poets the “critic whom every poet must contain” was
almost entirely silent, or conveyed his criticism through his verse
only. It would have been of the very first interest to have an Essay
from the hand of Euripides justifying his decadent and sentimental
fashion of drama, or from that of Lucretius on the theory and practice
of didactic verse: but the lips of neither were unsealed in this
direction. Dante, on the other hand, as we have seen, was prepared and
ready to put the rationale of his own verse, his own beliefs about
poetry, into prose: so at the Renaissance were the poets of Italy and
France; so was Dryden, so was Pope.

In no instance, however, save perhaps that of the Pléiade and Du
Bellay’s _Défense et Illustration_, did a protagonist of the new poetry
take the field in prose so early and so aggressively as did Wordsworth
in his Preface to the second edition of _Lyrical Ballads_. In none,
without exception, was such an attack so searchingly criticised and so
powerfully seconded, with corrections of its mistakes, as in the case of
the well-known chapters of the _Biographia Literaria_ in which Coleridge
examined Wordsworth’s examination. These, it is true, came later in
time, but when the campaign, whereof the first sword had been drawn in
the _Lyrical Ballads_, and the first horn blown in the Preface of their
second edition, though far gone was not finished, when the final blows,
by the hands of Keats and Shelley, had still to be struck.

[Sidenote: _The former’s Prefaces._]

The _Preface_, with the little group of other prefaces and observations
which supplements it,[349] provides a bundle of documents unequalled in
interest except by the _De Vulgari Eloquio_ in the special class, while,
as it happens, it goes directly against the tenor of that precious
booklet. Wordsworth, there can be no doubt, had been deeply annoyed by
the neglect or the contemptuous reception of the _Lyrical Ballads_, to
which hardly any one had done justice except the future Archdeacon
Wrangham, while his own poems in simple language had offended even more
than _The Ancient Mariner_ had puzzled. To some extent I do not question
that—his part of the scheme being to make the familiar poetical, just as
it was Coleridge’s to make the unfamiliar acceptable, the uncommon
common—the refusal of “poetic diction” which he here advances and
defends was a _vera causa_, a true actuating motive. But there is also,
I think, no doubt that, as so often happens, resentment, and a dogged
determination to “spite the fools,” made him here represent the
principle as much more deliberately carried out than it actually was.
And the same doggedness was no doubt at the root of his repetition of
this principle in all his subsequent prose observations, though, as has
been clear from the first to almost all impartial observers,[350] he
never, from _Tintern Abbey_ onwards, achieves his highest poetry, and
very rarely achieves high poetry at all, without putting that principle
in his pocket.

[Sidenote: _That to_ Lyrical Ballads, 1800.]

That the actual preface begins with a declaration that he was rather
more than satisfied with the reception of his poems, and that the
appearance of a systematic defence is set down to “request of friends,”
is of course not in the least surprising, and will only confirm any
student of human nature in the certainty that pique was really at the
bottom of the matter. As a matter of fact, there is no more typical
example of an aggressive-defensive _plaidoyer_ in the whole history of
literature.

[Sidenote: _Its history._]

It begins with sufficient boldness and originality (indeed “W. W.” was
never deficient in either) with admission that “by writing in verse, an
author is supposed to make a formal engagement that he will gratify
certain habits of association,” and merely urging that these habits have
varied remarkably. The principle here is sound enough; it is in effect
the same which we have traced in previous “romantic” criticism from
Shenstone onwards; but the historical illustrations are unfortunate.
They are “the age of Catullus, Terence, and Lucretius” contrasted with
that of Statius and Claudian, and “the age of Shakespeare and Beaumont
and Fletcher” with that of Donne and Cowley or Dryden and Pope. The
_nisus_ of the school towards the historic argument, and, at the same
time, its imperfect education in literary history, could hardly be
better illustrated. For, not to quibble about the linking of Statius and
Claudian, the age of Catullus and Lucretius was most certainly _not_ the
age of Terence; and the English pairs are still more luckless. Donne
_and_ Cowley, Shakespeare _and_ Beaumont and Fletcher, are bad enough in
themselves: but the postponement of Donne to the twin dramatists, when
he was the elder of Fletcher probably by six or seven years, of Beaumont
by ten or twelve, is rather sad. However, it is not on history that
Wordsworth bases his attack.

[Sidenote: _The argument against poetic diction, and even against
           metre._]

His object, he tells us, was to choose incidents and illustrations from
common life; to relate and describe them, as far as was possible, in a
selection of language really used by men; and at the same time to throw
over them a certain colouring of imagination, whereby ordinary things
should be presented to the mind in an unusual aspect—a long but much
less forcible appendix examining why the life so chosen was not merely
“ordinary,” but “rustic and humble.” The kernel of his next paragraph is
the famous statement that all good poetry is “the spontaneous overflow
of powerful feelings,” and then, after a little divagation, he sets to
work to show how such a style as he was using was adapted to be the
channel of such an overflow. He utterly refuses Personification: he “has
taken as much pains to avoid what is called Poetic Diction as is
ordinarily taken to produce it”; he “has at all times endeavoured to
look steadily at the subject with little falsehood of description”; and
he has not only denied himself false poetic diction, but many
expressions in themselves proper and beautiful, which have been
foolishly repeated by bad poets till they became disgusting. A selected
sonnet from Gray[351] is then rather captiously attacked for the sake of
showing (what certainly few will admit) that, in its only part of value,
the language differs in no respect from that of prose: whence the
heretic goes farther and, first asserting that there is _no_ essential
difference between the language of Prose and that of Poetry, proceeds in
a note to object to the opposition of Poetry and Prose at all, and to
the regarding of the former as synonymous with metrical composition.
Then he asks what a poet _is_: and answers himself at great length,
dwelling on the poet’s philosophical mission, but admitting that it is
his business to give pleasure. He anticipates the objection, “Why, then,
do you not write in Prose?” with the rather weak retort, “Why should I
not add the charm of metrical language to what I have to say?” A little
later comes the other famous definition of poetry as “emotion
recollected in tranquillity,” with a long and exceedingly unsuccessful
attempt to vindicate some work of his own from the charge of being
ludicrous. And the Preface ends with two candid but singularly damaging
admissions, that there _is_ a pleasure confessedly produced by metrical
compositions very different from his own, and that, in order entirely to
enjoy the poetry which he is undertaking, it would be necessary to give
up much of what is ordinarily enjoyed.

[Sidenote: _The appendix: Poetic Diction again._]

There is an appendix specially devoted to “Poetic Diction” in which
Wordsworth develops his objection to this. His argument is curious, and
from his own point of view rather risky. Early poets wrote from passion,
yet naturally, and so used figurative language: later ones, without
feeling passion, imitated them in the use of Figures, and so a purely
artificial diction was formed. So also metre was early added, and came
to be regarded as a symbol or promise of poetic diction itself. To which
of course it is only necessary to register the almost fatal demurrer,
“Why, if the early poets used figurative language different from
ordinary, may not later ones do so? or do you mean that Greek shoemakers
of Homer’s time said _koruthaiolos_ and _dolichoskion_?” Again, “How
about this curious early ‘superadding’ of metre? Where is your evidence?
and supposing you could produce any, what have you to say to the further
query, ‘If the metre was superadded, what could have been the reason,
except that some superaddition was felt to be wanted?’”

[Sidenote: _The Minor Critical Papers._]

It is proof of the rather prejudiced frame of mind in which Wordsworth
wrote that, in some subsequent criticisms of particulars, he objects to
Cowper’s “church-going bell” as “a strange abuse”—from which we must
suppose that he himself never talked of a “dining-room,” for it is
certain that the room no more dines than the bell goes to church. The
later papers on “Poetry as a Study,” and “Poetry as Observation and
Description,” are also full of interesting matter, though here, as
before, their literary history leaves much to desire, and though they
are full of examples of the characteristic stubbornness with which
Wordsworth clings to his theory. The most remarkable example probably of
this stubbornness is the astonishing note to the letter on the
last-named subject (addressed to Sir George Beaumont), in which, after
attributing to the poet Observation, Sensibility, Reflection,
Information, Invention, and Judgment, he adds, with a glance at his
enemy, Metre—“As sensibility to harmony of numbers _and the power of
producing it_ are _invariably_ attendants on the faculties above
specified, nothing has been said upon those requisites.” Perhaps there
is no more colossal _petitio principii_, and at the same time no more
sublime ignoring of facts, to be found in all literature, than that
“invariably.”

[Sidenote: _Coleridge’s examination of Wordsworth’s views._]

Interesting, however, as the Preface and its satellites are in
themselves, they are far more interesting as the occasion of the much
longer examination of the main document which forms the centre, and as
criticism the most valuable part, of the _Biographia Literaria_[352] of
Coleridge, Wordsworth’s fellow-worker in these same _Lyrical Ballads_.
That Wordsworth was himself not wholly pleased with this criticism of
his criticism, we know: and it would have been strange if he had been—
nay, if a much less arrogant and egotistical spirit than his had taken
it quite kindly. But Coleridge was on this occasion entirely within his
right. The examination, though in some parts unsparing enough, was
conducted throughout in the most courteous, indeed in the most
eulogistic, tone; the critic, especially after the lapse of so many
years,[353] could not be denied the right of pointing out the limits of
his agreement with a manifesto which, referring as it did to joint work
of his and another’s, might excusably be supposed to represent his
conclusions as well as those of his fellow-worker.

As to his competence for the task, there could even then be little, and
can now be no, dispute. Wordsworth himself, though he has left some
valuable critical dicta, had by no means all, or even very many, of the
qualifications of a critic. His intellect, save at his rare moments of
highest poetical inspiration, was rather strong than fine or subtle; and
it could not, even at those moments, be described as in any degree
flexible or wide-ranging. He carried into literature the temperament of
the narrowest theological partisan; and would rather that a man were not
poetically saved at all, than that he were saved while not following “W.
W.’s” own way. His reading, moreover, was far from wide, and his intense
self-centredness made him indifferent about extending it: while he
judged everything that he did read with reference to himself and his own
poetry.

[Sidenote: _His critical qualifications._]

In all these respects, except poetical intensity, Coleridge was his
exact opposite. But for a certain uncertainty, a sort of
Will-o'-the-Wispishness which displays itself in some of his individual
critical estimates—and for the too well-known inability to carry out his
designs, which is not perhaps identical, or even closely connected, with
this uncertainty,—he might be called, he may perhaps even in spite of
them be called, one of the very greatest critics of the world. He had
read immensely, and much of his reading had been in the philosophy of
æsthetics, more in pure literature itself. The play of his intellect—
when opium and natural tendency to digression did not drive it devious
and muddle it—was marvellously subtle, flexible, and fine. He could take
positions not his own with remarkable alacrity; was nothing if not
logical, and few things more than historical-literary. Further, such
egotisms as came into play in this particular quarrel all made for
righteousness in his case, while they were snares to Wordsworth. It may
be ungracious, but is not unfair, to say that Wordsworth’s contempt for
poetic diction, and his belittling of metre, arose very mainly from the
fact that, in his case, intense meaning was absolutely required to save
his diction from stiffness on the one hand and triviality on the other,
while he had no very special metrical gifts. Coleridge, though he
certainly had no lack of meaning, and could also write simply enough
when he chose, was a metrist[354] such as we have not more than five or
six even in English poetry, and could colour and harmonise language in
such a way that, at his best, not Shakespeare himself is his superior,
and hardly any one else his equal. The old, the true, sense of _Cui
bono?_ comes in here victoriously. It was certainly to Wordsworth’s
interest that diction and metre should be relegated to a low place.
Coleridge, though he had personal reasons for taking their part, could
do well without them, and was not obliged to be their champion.

[Sidenote: _Unusual integrity of his critique._]

However all this may be, there is no doubt about the importance of the
discussion of Wordsworth’s literary theories, in chaps. xiv. to xxii. of
the _Biographia_. Some have held that Coleridge could not write a book;
more have laid it down that he never did write one. Certainly the title
is to be allowed to the _Biographia_ as a whole only by the most elastic
allowance, while large parts of it are at best episodes, and at worst
sheer divagations. But, if books were not sacred things, it would be
possible, and of no inconsiderable advantage, to sub-title this part of
the book _A Critical Enquiry into the Principles which guided the
Lyrical Ballads, and Mr Wordsworth’s Account of Them_, to print this
alone as substantive text,[355] and to arrange all the rest as notes and
appendices.

[Sidenote: _Analysis of it._]

The examination begins with an interesting, and (whether Epimethean or
not) quite probable and very illuminative account of the actual plan of
the _Ballads_, and the principle on which the shares were allotted. He
and his friend, he tells us, had, during their neighbourly intercourse
in Somerset, often talked of the two cardinal points of poetry, the
power of exciting the sympathy of the reader by a faithful adherence to
the truth of nature, and the power of giving the interest of novelty by
the modifying colours of imagination. And he illustrates this finely, by
instancing the sudden charm which accidents of light and shade, of
moonlight or sunset, communicate to familiar objects.

[Sidenote: _The “suspension of disbelief.”_]

The _Ballads_ were to illustrate both kinds: and the poets were to
divide the parts generally on the principle of Coleridge endeavouring to
make the unfamiliar credible,[356] and Wordsworth the familiar charming.
And with a charity which, I fear, the _Preface_ will not bear, he
proceeds to represent its contentions as applying _only_ to the
practical poetical attempt which Wordsworth, in accordance with the
plan, was on this occasion making. He admits however, that Wordsworth’s
expressions are at any rate sometimes equivocal, and indicates his own
standpoint pretty early and pretty decisively by calling the phrase
“language of real life” _unfortunate_. And then he proceeds to state his
own view with very frequent glances—and more than glances—at his
companion’s.

[Sidenote: _Attitude to metre._]

From the first, however, it is obvious that on one of the two cardinal
points—the necessity or non-necessity of metre in poetry—he is, though
hardly to be called in two minds, for some reason or other reluctant to
speak out his one mind. The revival of this old heresy among such men as
Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, is the more to be wondered at, in that
their predecessors of the eighteenth century had by no means pronounced
on the other side in theory, and that therefore they themselves had no
excuse of reaction. No one who, at however many removes, followed or
professed to follow the authority of Aristotle, could deny that the
subject, not the form, made poetry and poems. But just as the tyranny of
a certain poetic diction led Wordsworth and others to strike at all
poetic diction, so the tyranny of certain metres seems to have induced
them to question the necessity of metre in general. At any rate
Coleridge’s language, though not his real drift, is hesitating and
sometimes almost self-contradictory. He will on the same page grant that
“all compositions to which this charm of metre is superadded, whatever
their contents, may be called poems,” and yet lay down that a poem is
“that species of composition which is opposed to works of science by
proposing for its immediate object pleasure, not truth,” and (after
adding to this a limitation, doubtless intended to take in metre, but
nebulous enough to justify Peacock himself,[357]) will once more clear
off his own mist by saying that if any one “chooses to call every
composition a poem which is rhyme or measure or both, I must leave his
opinion uncontroverted.”

That he himself saw the muddle is beyond doubt, and the opposite page
contains a curious series of _aporiæ_ which show the difficulty of
applying his own definition.[358] The first (_i.e._, fourteenth) chapter
ends with a soft shower of words, rhetorically pleasing rather than
logically cogent, about the poet “bringing the whole soul of man into
activity”; “fusing the faculties, each into each, by the synthetic and
magical power of imagination,” reconciling differences and opposites.
“Finally, good sense is the body of poetic genius, fancy its drapery,
emotion its life, and imagination the soul.” In the fifteenth and
sixteenth the author turns with evident relief from the definition of
the perhaps indefinable to an illustration of it by discussing _Venus
and Adonis_. Here, though it would be pleasant, it would be truancy to
follow him.

This study, however, is by no means otiose. It leads him to make a
comparison between the poetry of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, and that of “the present age,” a comparison of which not the
least notable point is a reference to the _De Vulgari Eloquio_.[359]
[Sidenote: _Excursus on Shakespeare’s_ Poems.] Coleridge seems only to
have known it in the Italian translation; but it is much that he should
have known it at all: and though he does not try to bring out its
diametrical opposition to Wordsworth, that opposition must have been,
consciously or unconsciously, in his mind. And then he comes back to
Wordsworth himself.

[Sidenote: _Challenges Wordsworth on “real” and “rustic” life._]

He now (chap. xvii.) strikes into a line less complimentary and more
corrective than his earlier remarks. It is true, he says, that much of
modern poetic style is false, and that some of the pleasure given by it
is false likewise. It is true, further, that W. W. has done good by his
sticklings for simplicity. But Coleridge cannot follow him in asserting
that “the proper diction for poetry in general consists altogether in
language taken from the mouths of men in real life.” And he proceeds to
show, by arguments so obvious and so convincing that it is unnecessary
to recapitulate them, that a doctrine of this kind is neither adequate
nor accurate—that Wordsworth’s own poems do not bear it out, and
(pushing farther) that poetry must be “_dis_realised” (he does not use
the word) as much as possible. He proceeds, cautiously and politely, but
very decidedly, to set the puerilities and anilities[360] of _The Idiot
Boy_ and _The Thorn_ in a clear light, which must have been extremely
disagreeable to their arrogant author; and goes on to pull W. W.'s
arguments, as well as his examples, to shreds and thrums. If you
eliminate, he says (and most truly), a rustic’s poverty of thought and
his “provincialism and grossness,” you get nothing different from “the
language of any other man of common-sense,” so that he will not help you
in the least; his speech does not in any degree represent the result of
special and direct communing with nature. Nay, “real” in the phrase
“real life” is itself a wholly treacherous and equivocal adjective. Nor
will you do any good by adding “in a state of excitement.”

[Sidenote: _“Prose” diction and metre again._]

In the next chapter, the eighteenth, Coleridge carries the fray farther
still into the enemy’s country, hitting the blot that though W. W.'s
_words_ may be quite ordinary, their arrangement is not. And after
wheeling about in this way, he comes at last to the main attack, which
he has so often feinted, on Wordsworth’s astounding dictum that “there
neither is nor can be any essential difference between the language of
prose and metrical composition.” After clearing his friend (and patient)
from an insinuation of paradox, he becomes a little “metaphysical”—
perhaps because he cannot help it, perhaps to give himself courage for
the subsequent accusation of “sophistry” which he ventures to bring. Of
course, he says, there are phrases which, beautiful in poetry, are quite
inappropriate in prose. The question is, “Are there no others which,
proper in prose, would be out of place in metrical poetry and _vice
versa_?” And he has no doubt about answering this question in the
affirmative, urging the origin of metre (for which, as we saw,
Wordsworth did not attempt to account), and its effects of use and
pleasure. He will not admit the appeal to nursery rhymes; and he
confesses (a confession which must have given W. W. dire offence) that
he should have liked _Alice Fell_ and the others much better in prose.

On the whole, Coleridge still shows too great timidity. He is obviously
and incomprehensibly afraid of acknowledging pleasure in the metre
itself. But—in this differing more signally from Wordsworth than from
Wordsworth’s uncompromising opponents—he says, “I write in metre,
_because_ I am about to use a language different from that of prose.”
And, though on grounds lower than the highest, he finally plucks up
courage to declare that “Metre is the proper form of poetry: and poetry
[is] imperfect and defective without metre.” ’Twill serve, especially
when he brings up in support, triarian fashion, “the instinct of seeking
unity by harmonious adjustment,” and “the practice of the best poets of
all countries and of all ages.”

[Sidenote: _Condemnation in form of Wordsworth’s theory._]

It is perhaps an anti-climax, though a very Coleridgean one, when he
proceeds to criticise (very justly) Wordsworth’s criticism of Gray, and
some passages both of his own and others: but we can have no quarrel
with him when he ends the chapter, too verbosely indeed, but
unanswerably, with the following conclusion of the whole matter: “When a
poem, or part of a poem, shall be adduced, which is evidently vicious in
the figures and contexture of its style, yet for the condemnation of
which no reason can be assigned, except that it differs from the style
in which men actually converse,—then and not till then can I hold this
theory to be either plausible or practicable, or capable of furnishing
either such guidance, or precaution, that might not, more easily and
more safely, as well as more naturally, have been deduced in the
author’s own mind from considerations of grammar, logic, and the truth
and nature of things, confirmed by the authority of works whose fame is
not of one country and of one age.”

[Sidenote: _The_ Argumentum ad Gulielmum.]

He has now (chaps. xix., xx.) argued himself into more confidence than
he had shown earlier, and seems disposed to retract his concession that
W. W.'s limitations were _not_ intended to apply to all poetry. He sees,
indeed, from the criticism on Gray, and from Wordsworth’s references to
Milton, that this concession was excessive, but still he thinks the
general notion too monstrous for Wordsworth to have held. And he
swerves, once more, to point out the especial beauty of beautiful
diction and beautiful metre _added_ to fine or just thought, and
introduces interesting but rather superfluous examples of this from all
manner of poets down to Wordsworth himself. These last lead him to the
very just conclusion, “Were there excluded from Mr W.'s poetic
compositions all that a literal adherence to the theory of his Preface
would exclude, two-thirds at least of the marked beauties of his poetry
must be erased.”[361] Which indeed is once more a conclusion of the
whole matter.[362]

[Sidenote: _The study of his poetry._]

After an odd, a distinctly amusing, but despite its title a, for our
purpose, somewhat irrelevant, excursus on “the present mode of
conducting critical journals,”[363] Coleridge concludes with a pretty
long[364] and a very interesting examination of Wordsworth’s poetry. He
brings out his defects, his extraordinary declension from the felicitous
to the undistinguished, his matter-of-factness of various kinds (this
part includes a merciless though most polite censure of _The
Excursion_), his undue preference for dramatic [perhaps we should say
dialogic] form, his prolixity, and his introduction of thoughts and
images too great as well as too low for the subject. The excellences are
high purity and appropriateness of language; weight and sanity of
thoughts and sentiments; strength; originality and _curiosa felicitas_
in single lines and paragraphs; truth of nature in imagery; meditative
pathos; and, lastly, imagination in the highest and strictest sense of
the word.

[Sidenote: _High merits of the examination._]

In fact this chapter, which forms in itself an essay of the major scale,
is one of the patterns, in English, of a critical study of poetry. None,
I think, had previously exhibited the new criticism so thoroughly, and
very few, if any, have surpassed or equalled it since, although it may
be a little injured on the one hand by its limitation to a particular
text, and by the restrictions which the personal relations of the critic
with his author imposed on Coleridge; on the other, by his own
tendencies to digression, verbosity, and intrusion of philosophical
“heads of Charles I.” In fact, there is no other critical document known
to me which attacks the chief and principal things of poetry proper—
poetic language and poetic numbers—in so satisfactory a manner, despite
the economy which Coleridge displays on the latter head. Some of the
ancient and most of the Renaissance discussions shoot too far and too
high, and though the arrows may catch fire and give a brilliant and
striking illumination, they hit no visible mark. The discussions of
Lessing in the _Laocoön_ concern an interesting but after all quite
subordinate point of the relation of poetry to other arts; nearly all of
those in the _Dramaturgie_ deal with a part of literature only, and with
one which is not, in absolute necessity or theory, a part of literature
at all. But here we have the very _differentia_ of poetry, handled as in
the Περὶ Ὕψους or the _De Vulgari_ itself, but handled in a more full,
generally applicable, and philosophically based manner than Dante’s
prose admitted of, and in a wider range than is allowed by the special
purpose of Longinus.

[Sidenote: _Wordsworth a rebel to Longinus and Dante._]

With both these great lights of criticism Coleridge agrees almost as
thoroughly as Wordsworth disagrees with them: and it is proper here to
fulfil the promise which was made[365] of a consideration of
Wordsworth’s work in reference to Dante specially, but with extension to
Longinus as well.

The collision of Wordsworth with Longinus appears in the very title of
the famous little treatise. Fight as we may about the exact meaning of
ὕψος, it must be evident, to poets and pedlars alike, that it never can
apply to the “ordinary language of real life”; struggle as
Wordsworthians may, they never can establish a _concordat_ between the
doctrine of the _Preface_ and the doctrine of the “beautiful word.” But
as Longinus was not specifically writing of Poetry, and as in reference
to Poetry he was writing from his own point of view only, on a special
function or aspect of Poetry and Rhetoric alike, he does not meet the
Apostle of the Ordinary full tilt and weapon to weapon. I have said that
I do not know whether, when Wordsworth wrote the _Preface_, he knew the
_De Vulgari_ or not. If Coleridge had known it at the time, he probably
would have imparted his knowledge in the celebrated Nether Stowey talks:
but his own reference, itself not suggestive of a very thorough
appreciation, is twenty years later. And as Wordsworth was a perfectly
fearless person, and had not a vestige of an idea that any created thing
had authority sufficient to overcrow W. W., he would pretty certainly
have rebuked this Florentine, and withstood him to his face, if he had
known his utterances.

[Sidenote: _The_ Preface _compared more specially with the_ De Vulgari,]

But, on the other hand, Dante himself might almost have been writing
with the _Preface_ before him (except that had he done so Wordsworth
would probably have been at least in Purgatory), considering the
directness, the almost rude lie-circumstantial of the antidote. “Take
the ordinary language, especially of rustic men,” says Wordsworth.
“Avoid rustic [“silvan”] language altogether,” says Dante, “and even of
‘urban’ words let only the noblest remain in your sieve.” “If you have
Invention, Judgment, and half a dozen other things,” every one of which
has been possessed in more or less perfection by most of the great
writers of the world whether in prose or poetry, “metrical expertness
will follow as a matter of course,” says Wordsworth. “You must, after
painfully selecting the noblest words and arranging them in the noblest
style, further arrange them in the best line that experience and genius
combined can give you, and yet further build these lines into the
artfullest structure that art has devised,” says Dante. “Poetry is
spontaneous utterance,” says he of Cockermouth. “Poetry, and the
language proper for it, is a regular ‘panther-quest,’ an elaborate and
painful toil,” says the Florentine.

[Sidenote: _and Dante’s practice_]

And their practice is no less opposed than their theory; or rather the
relation of the two, to theory and practice taken together, is the most
astonishing contrast to be found in Poetry. Dante never falsifies his
theory for a moment. You cannot find a line, in _Commedia_ or _Vita
Nuova_ or anywhere else, where the “panther-quest” of word, and phrase,
and line-formation, and stanza-grouping is not evident; you will be put
to it to find one where this quest is not consummately successful. And,
in following word and phrase and form, Dante never forgets or starves
his meaning. He may be sometimes obscure, but never because there is no
meaning to discern through the gloom. He may be sometimes technical; but
the technicality is never otherwise than the separable garb of a
“strange and high” thought and intention. Matter and form with him admit
no divorce: their marriage is not the marriage of two independent
entities, but the marriage of soul and body. He has no need of the
alternation of emotion and tranquillity, of the paroxysm succeeded by
the notebook (or interrupted by it and succeeded by the fair copy),
because his emotion and his tranquillity are identical, because the tide
of his poetry is the tide “too full for sound or foam,” at least for
splash or spoondrift. He is methodical down to the counting of syllables
in poetic words: and yet who has more poetic madness than he?

[Sidenote: _with Wordsworth’s._]

The difference in Wordsworth is almost startling; it looks as if it had
been “done on purpose.” He does obey his theory, does accept the
language of ordinary life.[366] But when he does so, as (almost)
everybody admits, he is too often not poetical at all—never in touch
with the highest poetry.[367] And (which is extremely remarkable and has
not, I think, been remarked by Coleridge or by many other critics) even
in these poems he has not the full courage of his opinions. In no single
instance does he venture on the experiment of discarding the merely
“superadded charm” of metre, of which he has such a low opinion. He
never in one single instance relies on the sheer power of “spontaneous
overflow of powerful feelings” on the impetus of “emotion recollected in
tranquillity,” _without_ metre. In the form of poetry, which he affects
to despise, he is even as these publicans.

These are two sufficiently striking points; but they are not so striking
as the third. Wordsworth _is_ a great poet; he _has_ moments of all but
the sublimest—for this argument we need certainly not grudge to say of
the sublimest—poetry. He can bathe us in the light of setting suns, and
introduce us even to that which never was on sea and land;[368] he can
give us the full contact, the full ecstasy, the very “kiss of the
spouse.” But in no single instance, again, does he achieve these
moments, except—as Coleridge has pointed out to some extent, and as can
be pointed out without shirking or blenching at one “place” of poetry—at
the price of utterly forgetting his theory, of flinging it to the tides
and the winds, of plunging and exulting in poetic diction and poetic
arrangement.

[Sidenote: _The comparison fatal to Wordsworth as a critic._]

So we can only save Wordsworth the poet—in which salvage there is
fortunately not the slightest difficulty—at the expense of Wordsworth
the critic. Even in these curious documents of critical suicide there
are excellent critical utterances _obiter_, and some even of the
propositions in the very argument itself are separately, if not in their
context, justifiable. He might, if he could have controlled himself,
have made a very valuable exposure, not merely of false poetic diction,
but of that extremely and monotonously _mannerised_ poetic diction
which, though not always bad in its inception and to a certain extent,
becomes so by misusage and overusage. He might have developed his
polemic against the personification of Gray and others with real
advantage. He might have arranged a conspectus of the sins of
eighteenth-century poetic diction, which would have been a most valuable
pendant to Johnson’s array of the extravagances of the Metaphysicals. He
might—if he had carried out and corrected that theory of his of the
necessity of antecedent “powerful feelings” in the poet—have produced a
“Paradox of the Poet” which would have been as true as Diderot’s on the
Actor, and have had far greater value. But he did none of these things;
and what he did do is itself not even a paradox—it is a paralogism.

[Sidenote: _Other critical places in Coleridge._]

How much better Coleridge comes out of this affair has already been
partly said. But these concluding chapters[369] of the _Biographia_,
though certainly his capital critical achievement, are very far from
being his only one. Indeed, next to his poetical, his critical work is
Coleridge’s greatest: and with all his everlasting faults of
incompleteness, digression, cumbrousness of style,[370] and what not, it
gives him a position inferior to no critic, ancient or modern, English
or foreign. But it is scattered all over his books, and it would not be
ill done if some one would extract it from the mass and set it together.
In surveying such examples of it as are here most important, we shall
take the convenient Bohn edition of Coleridge’s Prose, following the
contents of its volumes, but supplementing them to no small extent with
the very interesting and only recently printed notes which Mr Ernest
Coleridge published as _Anima Poetæ_, and with a glance at the
_Letters_.

[Sidenote: _The rest of the_ Biographia.]

Coleridge himself, at the very beginning of the _Biographia_, has
indicated the discussion of the question of Poetic Diction as the main
point which he had in view; but, with all its gaps and all its lapses,
the whole book is among the few which constitute the very Bible of
Criticism. The opening, with its famous description of the author’s
education in the art under the merciless and yet so merciful ferule of
Boyer or Bowyer; the reference to Bowles—so little important in himself
and on Arnoldian principles, so infinitely important to “_them_,” and so
to history and to us, the “us” of every subsequent time; the personal
digressions on himself and on Wordsworth and on Southey—are among “the
topmost towers of Ilion,” the best illustrations of that “English
fashion of criticism” of which, as has been said, Dryden laid the
foundations nearly a century and a half earlier by uniting theory with
elaborate, and plentiful, and apparently indiscriminate, examples from
practice.

[Sidenote: The Friend.]

One seldom feels inclined to be more angry[371] with Coleridge’s habit
of “Prommy pas Payy”[372] than in reference to that introduction to the
_Ancient Mariner_—dealing with the supernatural, and with the difference
between Imagination and Fancy—to which he coolly refers the reader as if
it existed,[373] just before the actual examination of Wordsworth’s
theories in the _Biographia_, and after the long digressions, Hartleian,
biographical proper, and what not, which fill the second division of the
book. But that one does well to be angry is not quite so certain. The
discussion would probably have been the reverse of methodical, and it is
very far from unlikely that everything good in it is actually cast up
here, or there, on the “Rich Strand” of his actual work. To return to
that work,[374] there is little criticism in the extraordinary
mingle-mangle of religion, politics, and philosophy, of “Bell and Ball:
Ball and Bell,” Maria Schoening and Dr Price, called _The Friend_,
whichever of its two forms[375] be taken. At the beginning there are one
or two remarks which seem to promise matter of our kind, and there is
some good Shakespeare comment at p. 299: but that is about all.

[Sidenote: Aids to Reflection, _&c._]

Neither should we expect (save on the principle that in Coleridge the
unexpected very generally happens) anything in the _Aids to Reflection_
or the _Confessions of an Enquiring Spirit_, though in the first there
are some of the usual girds at anonymous reviewing, and the second is
important enough for that equivocal if not bastard variety of our kind
which has “Biblical” or “Higher” tacked before it. But the three
remaining volumes[376] are almost compact of our matter, while there is
not a little of it, and of the very best quality, in the _Anima Poetæ_.

[Sidenote: _The_ Lectures on Shakespeare, _&c._]

The great storehouse next to the _Biographia_ is, of course, the
_Lectures on Shakespeare_ with their satellite fragments, unsatisfactory
as are the conditions under which we have all these things. There is
perhaps no more astounding example of the tricks of self-deception than
Coleridge’s statement to Allsop that he had “_written_” three volumes of
five hundred pages each, containing a complete critical history of the
English drama, and “requiring neither addition, omission, nor
correction—nothing but mere arrangement.” What we actually have of his
whole critical work, outside the _Biographia_, consists of perhaps
one-third that amount of his own and other people’s notes of Lectures,
very rarely consecutive at all, requiring constant omission because of
repetition, and defying the art of the most ingenious _diaskeuast_ to
get them into anything like order, and of a smaller but still
considerable mass of _Marginalia_, pocket-book entries, and fragments of
the most nondescript kinds. And we know from indisputable testimony by
persons who actually heard the _Lectures_ which these notes represent,
that if we possessed reports _in extenso_ by the most accurate and
intelligent of reporters, things would be not so very much better,
because of Coleridge’s incurable habit of apology, digression,
anticipation, and repetition. That he found a written lecture an
intolerable trammel, and even notes irksome, if he stuck close to them,
we can readily believe. Many, if not most, lecturers would agree with
him. But it is given to few people, and certainly was not given to him,
to speak _ex-tempore_ on such subjects in a fashion which will bear
printing. And his lectures have, as we have said, only very rarely had
even the chance of standing this.

[Sidenote: _Their chaotic character_]

Nevertheless, we are perhaps not in reality so very much worse off.
Extreme method in criticism is something of a superstition, and, as we
have seen, the greatest critical book of the world, that of Longinus,
has, as we possess it, very little of this, and does not appear ever to
have had very much. The critic does his best work, not in elaborating
theories which will constantly break down or lead him wrong when they
come into contact with the myriad-sided elusiveness of Art and Humanity,
but in examining individual works or groups of work, and in letting his
critical steel strike the fire of mediate axioms and _aperçus_ from the
flint of these. It does the recipient rather good than harm to have to
take the trouble of selecting, co-ordinating, and adjusting such things
for himself; at any rate, he escapes entirely the danger of that deadly
bondage to a cut-and-dried scheme which was the curse of the Neo-classic
system. And there is no critic who provides these examinations and
_aperçus_ and _axiomata media_ more lavishly than Coleridge.[377]

[Sidenote: _and preciousness._]

I remember still, with amusement after many years, the words of, I
suppose, a youthful reviewer who, admitting that an author whom he was
reviewing had applied the method of Coleridge as to Shakespeare, &c.,
with some skill and even some originality, hinted that this method was
quite _vieux jeu_, and that modern criticism was taking and to take an
entirely different line. And I have been grateful to that reviewer ever
since for giving me a mental smile whenever I think of him. That his new
critical Evangel—it was the “scientific” gospel of the late M.
Hennequin, if “amid the memories long outworn Of many-_volumed eve and_
morn” I do not mistake—has itself gone to the dustbin meanwhile does not
matter, and is not the cause of the smile. The risibility is in the
notion that any great criticism can ever be obsolete. We may, we must,
we ought sometimes to differ with Aristotle and Longinus, with
Quintilian and Scaliger, with Patrizzi and Castelvetro, with Dryden and
Johnson, with Sainte-Beuve and Arnold. But what is good in them—and even
what, though not so intrinsically good, is injured only by system and
point of view, by time and chance and fatality—remains a possession for
ever. “The eternal substance of their greatness” is of the same kind
(although it be less generally recognised or relished) as the greatness
of creation. _La Mort n’y mord_.

Of such matter Coleridge provides us with abundance everywhere, and
perhaps most on Shakespeare. He acknowledges his debts to Lessing, and
was perhaps unduly anxious to deny any to the Schlegels; but he has made
everything that he may have borrowed his own, and he has wealth untold
that is not borrowed at all. He can go wrong like other people. His
favourite and constantly repeated denunciation of Johnson’s couplet—

                  “Let Observation with extensive view
                  Survey mankind from China to Peru”—

as “bombast and tautology,” as equivalent to “let observation with
extensive observation survey mankind extensively,” is not only unjust
but actually unintelligent,[378] and probably due only to the horror of
eighteenth-century personification, intensified in Coleridge by the fact
that in his own early poems he had freely indulged therein.

[Sidenote: _Some noteworthy things in them: general,_]

But on the very opposite page[379]—in the very corresponding lines which
shut up on this carping when the book is closed—we read, “To the young I
would remark that it is always unwise to judge of anything by its
defects: the first attempt ought to be to discover its excellences.” I
have found nothing better for the motto of this Book; I cannot imagine
anything better as a corrective of the faults of Neo-classic critics—as
a “Take away that bauble!” the stop-watch. Again, observe the admirable
separation of poet and dramatist in Lecture vii. of the 1811
course;[380] the remarks (suggested perhaps by Lessing, but in no
respect an echo of him) on poetry and painting in the Ninth;[381] and
the altogether miraculous “character” of Ariel which follows.[382] The
defences of Shakespeare’s puns are always consummate[383]—in fact, “Love
me, love my pun,” should be one of the chief articles of a Shakespearian
Proverb-book. In the notes referring (or supposed to refer) to the
course of 1818, variations of the _Biographia_ (published the year
before) were sure to occur and do; one of the most noteworthy being the
expansion and application of the idea of “suspension of disbelief.”[384]
Note, too, the acuteness in the censure[385] (with half-apologies) of
the absurd stage-directions which characterised German, and characterise
Scandinavian, drama.

[Sidenote: _and particular._]

Of the separate notes on Shakespeare’s Plays it is impossible to say
much here: and indeed it is not necessary. They are to be read—if
possible in conjunction with the plays themselves—by everybody: to
digest them into a formal treatise would be perhaps impossible, and, as
hinted above, would not be a testimonial to their value if it were
possible. But their great merit, next to their individual felicity, is
the constant cropping up of those _aperçus_ of a more general, though
not too general, cast which have been noticed.

[Sidenote: _Coleridge on other dramatists._]

Coleridge never admires Shakespeare too much; but the Devil’s Advocate
may perhaps make something of a count against him that he is often apt
to depress others by a comparison, which is not in the least necessary.
On Ben Jonson he is rather inadequate than unjust; but he is certainly
unjust to Beaumont and Fletcher, and I almost fear that his injustice,
like his more than justice to Massinger, may be set down to
extra-literary causes. It is extraordinary that such a critic should
have used the language that he uses of Florimel in _The Maid of the
Mill_.[386] Her devices to preserve her honour are extravagant: this
extravagance, as compared with the perfect _naturalness_ of Shakespeare,
is the constant note of “the twins”; and if Coleridge had confined
himself to bringing it out, there would have been no more to be said.
But his remarks are here not merely unjust, they are silly. And yet
here, too, we could find the priceless _obiter dicta_, that on words
that have made their way despite precisian objection,[387] those on
metre[388] almost always, and others.

[Sidenote: _The_ Table Talk.]

The motes fly thick for us in the _Table Talk_; and as they are clearly
headed and indexed in the edition referred to, there is the less need of
additional specification, while there is, here as everywhere, a good
deal of repetition.[389] But one must point in passing to the striking
contrast of Schiller’s “material sublime”[390] (and Coleridge was not
inclined to undervalue Schiller[391]) with Shakespeare’s economy of
means; the pertinent, though by no means final, question, “If you take
from Virgil his diction and metre, what do you leave him?”[392] the
remarks on Spenser’s “swan-like movement”;[393] a remarkable cluster of
literary dicta in the entry for Midsummer-Day 1827 (when H. N. says that
his uncle talked “a volume”), to be supplemented by another sheaf on
July 12; the contrast of Milton and Shakespeare;[394] the remarks on
Rabelais;[395] the wonderfully pregnant one as to the “three silent
revolutions in England”;[396] those on Latin Literature;[397] on the
evolutionary quality of genius;[398] another great _obiter dictum_,[399]
that “Great minds are never in the wrong, but in consequence _of being
in the right imperfectly_,” which is truest of all in criticism itself;
yet another,[400] “To please me, a poem must be either music or sense:
if it is neither, I confess I cannot interest myself in it”; and, above
all, that on Tennyson[401]—one of the _loci classici_ of warning to the
greatest critics to distrust themselves when they are judging the poetry
of the “younger generations.” And if we cannot help reproachfully
ejaculating “Æschylus!” when he denies[402] sublimity to the Greeks, let
us again remember that Æschylus was strangely _occulted_ to the whole
Neo-classic age, and that it is very much Coleridge’s own doing that we
of the last two or three generations have re-discovered him.

[Sidenote: _The_ Miscellanies.]

The few contributions, shortly supplemented from MS., to Southey’s
_Omniana_ give little, but the volume now entitled _Miscellanies,
Æsthetic and Literary_, is very nearly all ours. Much of it, however, is
repetition in apparent title, and a good deal of the rest does not quite
answer expectations. The general _Essays on the Fine Arts_ with which it
opens (and of which the author, who had lost them, entertained that
perhaps rather exaggerated idea which we usually entertain of lost
loves, books, fishes, &c.) possess in abundance Coleridge’s uniquely
stimulating quality, but, perhaps in not much less abundance, his
extreme desultoriness and want of definition, save of the most
indefinite character. The essay on the _Prometheus_ which follows
excites (though hardly in the wary mind, Estesianly “alphabeted,” as he
would himself say) great expectations. But it is scarcely too much to
say that on this—the most purely poetical of all extant Greek dramas, a
miracle of sublimity and humanity mingled, and the twin pillar, with the
_Agamemnon_, of its author’s claim to be one of the greatest poets of
the world—Coleridge has not a word to say that even touches the poetry.
He is philosophico-mythological from the egg to the apple; and one is
bound to add that he here shows one of his gravest drawbacks as a
critic. The new fragments, however, of the 1818 lectures are full of
good matter, on Cervantes especially, perhaps a little less specially on
Dante, on Robinson Crusoe very particularly indeed, on Rabelais and
Sterne and Donne: while these are taken up and multiplied in interest by
the “Marginalia,” with which the literary part of the book concludes,
and which contain, on Daniel and Chapman and Selden, Browne and Fuller,
Fielding and Junius, some of the best known and nearly of the best of
their author’s critical work. Here also, and here only, do we find much
on Milton, Coleridge’s rather numerous lectures on him having left
surprisingly little trace. He is, though a fervent admirer, not quite at
his happiest.

[Sidenote: _The Lecture_ On Style.]

But the most interesting piece that the book contains is the Lecture on
Style, with its satellite note (a small but sparkling star) on the
“Wonderfulness of Prose.”[403] The author’s definition of his most
elusive subject is indeed not only not satisfying, but (unless you
remember his own dictum about being “right incompletely”) demonstrably
and almost astoundingly _un_satisfactory. “Style is of course nothing
but the art of conveying the meaning appropriately and with
perspicuity.” One feels inclined in one’s haste to say, “That is just
what it is _not_”; one must cool down a little before one can modify
this to “Style begins exactly where” the art, &c., “leaves off,” and one
can perhaps never come nearer to an accommodation than “The necessary
preliminary to Style, and one essential ingredient of it,” is “the art,”
and so forth.[404] It was no doubt this side of the matter that
Coleridge was looking at, and at this he stopped, as far as his general
way of looking at the thing went. But the main interest of the piece
does not lie here. He bases his definition on, and tries to adjust it
to, a survey of English style, which is probably one of the first of the
kind ever attempted, after the notion of the Queen Anne men being the
crown and flower of English had been given up. And though his history,
as was natural, is sometimes shaky, and his conclusions are often to be
disputed and even overthrown, the whole is of the highest value, not
merely as a _point de repère_ historically, but as an introduction to
the consideration of Style itself.

[Sidenote: _The_ Anima Poetæ.]

But the book of Coleridge which, next to the _Biographia_, is of most
importance to the student of his criticism, is perhaps the
long-posthumous _Anima Poetæ_. Mr Ernest Coleridge, in his preface to
the _Anima_ itself, says that the _Biographia_ is now little read. I
hope he is wrong: but if he is right it would explain many things.

This volume—a collection of extracts from Coleridge’s pocket-books—
appeared[405] more than sixty years after the poet’s death, and the
notice taken of it was comparatively small. That it contains passages of
ornate prose superior to anything in the previously published writings
is interesting, but for our purpose almost irrelevant: it is not so that
it gives the fullest and clearest side-lights on Coleridge’s criticism
that we have. The earliest years (and pages) are not very fertile,
though I subjoin some references[406] which will assist the reader in
looking them up. But from p. 119 for some fifty pages onward (it is
significant that the time of writing, 1805-8, corresponds with
Coleridge’s absence in Malta, &c., from which we have little or no
published work) the entries are “diamondiferous.” On French poetry
(mistaken but so informingly!);[407] on Cowper;[408] on the absurdity of
calling etymology (how much more philology!) a “science”;[409] on the
attitude to poetry and to books;[410] on Leibnitz’s “profound sentence”
that “men’s intellectual errors consist chiefly in _denying_”;[411] on
the “instinctive passion in the mind for one word to express one act of
feeling” (Flaubert fifty years before date); on pseudo-originality,—
Coleridge is at his very acme. The _yeast_ of criticism—the reagent
which, itself created by the contact of the critical with the creative,
re-creates itself in all fit media—has never been more remarkably
represented than here.

And great as are these passages, there are many others (though not so
many in close context) to match them. See the entry (which I venture to
think has been wrongly side-headed as “A plea for poetic license” at the
foot of p. 165) as to the desire of carrying things to a greater height
of pleasure and admiration than they are susceptible of—the old “wish to
write better than you can,” the “loss of sight between this and the
other style.”[412] See the astonishing anticipation of the best side of
Ruskinism in the note on architecture and climate;[413] and that on
poetry and prose and on the “esenoplastic” power;[414] and that on
somebody (Byron?) who was “splendid” everywhere, but nowhere
poetical;[415] and that on scholastic terms;[416] and that on the slow
comprehension of certain (in this case Dantean) poetry.[417] They are
all _apices criticismi_—not easy reading, not for the running man, but
for him who reads them fitly, certain to bear fruit if he reads them
early, to coincide with his own painful and struggling attainments if he
reads them late.

[Sidenote: _The_ Letters.]

Nor must the _Letters_[418] be omitted in any sufficient survey of
Coleridge’s criticism. That at one early period[419] he apparently
thought Schiller more sublime than Milton is not in the least to his
discredit. He was twenty-two; he was, I think, demonstrably in love with
_three_ ladies[420] at once, and extremely uncertain which of two of
them he should marry—a state of mind neither impossible nor unnatural,
but likely to lead to considerable practical difficulties, and to upset
the judgment very decidedly. His minor critical remarks at this very
time on Southey’s poems are excellent. That Bowles should be “divine”
and Burke “sad stuff”[421] does not matter—we can explain both
statements well enough. But how many men of three- or four-and-twenty
(or for that matter of three- or four-and-seventy) were there, are
there, have there ever been, who could ask, “Why pass an _Act of
Uniformity_ against poets?”[422] one of the great critical questions of
the world, and never, so far as I remember, formulated so pertinently
before. It is odd that he should have forgotten (if he knew) Sidney, in
his singular and pedantic complaint that to give the name Stella to a
woman is “unsexing” it, and his supposition that “Swift is the
authority.”[423] But another astonishing critical truth is that “Poetry
ought not always to have its _highest_ relish”;[424] and yet another in
the contrast[425] of himself with Southey, “I think too much to be a
poet; he too little to be a great poet,” unjust as the application is in
the first half; and yet again on metre itself “_implying_ a
passion,”[426] a passage worth comparing with, and in some points better
than, the _Biographia_ (with which compare also pp. 386, 387). Nor these
alone, but many others later—the criticism on Wordsworth’s “Cintra”
pamphlet;[427] that on the inadequacy of one style for all
purposes;[428] the remarks on stage illusion,[429]—might be cited.

[Sidenote: _The Coleridgean position and quality._]

When the first volume of this history was published, an excellent
scholar said to me, “How will you ever finish that book? Why, Coleridge
himself would take a volume!” There is something to be said for the
hyperbole. In this and that critic, of these many ages which we have
essayed to survey, we may find critical graces which are not in him; but
in all, save two, we shall find corresponding deficiencies. In all the
ancient critics, save these two, the limitation of the point of view,
the hamper of the scheme, are disastrously felt, nor is either Aristotle
or Longinus quite free from them. In the greatest of the
sixteenth-century Italians these limitations recur, and are repeated in
most of those of the seventeenth and eighteenth. Dante is of the
greatest, but he touches the subject very briefly and from a special
side. Dryden is great, but he is not fully informed, and comes too early
for his own point of view. Fontenelle is very nearly great, but he has
the same drawbacks, and adds to them those of an almost, perhaps a
quite, wilful eccentricity and capriciousness. Lessing is great, but he
has fixed his main attention on the least literary parts of literature;
while Goethe later is great but a great pedant.[430] Hazlitt is great;
but Coleridge was Hazlitt’s master, and beside the master the pupil is
insular and parochial in range and reading if not in spirit. In
Sainte-Beuve himself we want a little more theory; some more enthusiasm;
a higher and more inspiriting choice of subjects. And in Mr. Arnold the
defects of Fontenelle reappear without Fontenelle’s excuse of
chronology.

So, then, there abide these three, Aristotle, Longinus, and Coleridge.
The defects of the modern, as contrasted with the ancient, man of
letters are prominent in Coleridge when we compare him with these his
fellows: and so we cannot quite say that he is the greatest of the
three. But his range is necessarily wider: he takes in, as their date
forbade them to take, all literature in a way which must for centuries
to come give him the prerogative. It is astonishing how often, when you
have discovered in others of all dates, or (as you may fondly hope)
found out for yourself, some critical truth, you will remember that
after all Coleridge in his wanderings has found it before, and set it by
the wayside for the benefit of those who come after. For all, I believe,
of these later days—certainly for all whose mother-tongue is English—
Coleridge is the critical author to be turned over by day and by night.
Never take him on trust: it is blasphemy to the Spirit of Criticism to
do that with any critic. Disagree with him as often as you like, and as
you can stand to the guns of your disagreement. But begin with him,
continue with him, come back to him after excursions, with a certainty
of suggestion, stimulation, correction, edification. _C’est mon métier à
moi d'être professeur de littérature_, and I am not going to _parvify_
my office. But if anybody disestablished us all (with decent pensions,
of course), and applied the proceeds of our Chairs to furnishing the
boxes of every one who goes up to the University with a copy of the
_Biographia Literaria_, I should decline to be the person chosen to be
heard against this revolution, though I should plead for the addition of
the _Poetics_ and of Longinus.

[Sidenote: _He introduces once for all the criterion of Imagination,
           realising and disrealising._]

And if any one is still dissatisfied with particular critical
utterances, and even with the middle axioms interspersed among them, let
him remember that Coleridge—not Addison, not the Germans, not any other—
is the real introducer into the criticism of poetry of the realising and
disrealising Imagination as a criterion. Even now, a hundred years after
his earliest day as a critic, the doctrine, though much talked of, is
apparently little understood. Even such a critic as the late Mr Traill,
while elsewhere[431] admitting that “on poetic _expression_” Coleridge
“has spoken the absolutely last word,” almost apologised[432] for his
putting on a level “lending the charm of imagination to the real” and
“lending the force of reality to the imaginary.” He confessed that,
“from the point of view of the highest conception of the poet’s office
there can be no comparison”—where indeed I might also “say ditto to Mr
Burke,” but in a sense opposite to his. And if, on such a mind and such
an appreciation as Mr Traill’s, this one-sided interpretation of “the
_esenoplastic_ faculty” had hold, how much more on others in increasing
measure to the present day? The fallacy is due, first, to the hydra-like
vivacity of the false idea of _mimesis_, the notion that it is not
re-presentation, re-creation _adding_ to Nature, but copying her; and,
secondly, to the Baconian conception of poetry as a _vinum dæmonum_, a
poison with some virtue as a medicine. What power these errors have all
our history has shown,—all Histories of Criticism that ever can be
written will show if they are written faithfully. But Coleridge has
provided—once for all, if it be not neglected—the safeguard against this
in his definitions of the two, the co-equal, the co-eternal functions of
the exercise of the poetic Imagination.

[Sidenote: _The “Companions.”_]

In the title of the present chapter I have used the word “companions” in
a double sense—the first and special application of it being that in
which it is technically applied to the Companions of the Prophet—to the
early coadjutors of Mahomet in his struggle with the Koreish. Of these
the chief are Southey, Lamb, Leigh Hunt, and Hazlitt, with perhaps as an
even closer ally—though unknowing and unknown—William Blake. Then follow
companions in the wider sense—associates in the work, who varied from
nearly complete alliance, as with Scott, to very distant and lukewarm
participation, as in Campbell, and (in literary position) from the
captaincy of Scott again and of Shelley to the more than respectable
full-privateship of the contributors to the _Retrospective Review_. As
for the “Adversaries,” they can be more briefly dealt with, for their
work was mostly “wood, hay, stubble”; but Gifford and Jeffrey at least
could not be excluded here, and a few more may deserve notice. So let
the inquiry proceed in this order.

[Sidenote: _Southey._]

It may seem at first sight curious, and will perhaps always remain a
little so, that we have no collected examples, nor many uncollected but
singly substantive pieces, of strictly critical work, from the most
widely read and the most industrious of the whole literary group of
1800-1830 in England—from a man who, for eleven years at least, wrote
reviews almost wherever he could place them without hurting his
conscience, and who for another five-and-twenty was a pillar of one of
the greatest of critical periodicals. But Southey’s earlier reviewing is
for the most part not merely whelmed in the dust-bins of old magazines,
but, as his son and biographer complains, extremely difficult to trace
even there; and his later was, by choice or by chance (more I think by
the former than by the latter), mainly devoted to subjects not purely
literary. If that great _Bibliotheca Britannica_[433] (which so nearly
existed, and which is a thing lacking in English to this present day, a
hundred years later) had come actually into existence, it would hardly
have been necessary to look beyond that: as it is, one has the pleasing
but rather laborious and lengthy duty of fishing out and piecing
together critical expressions from _The Doctor_ and other books to some
extent, and from the two parallel collections of the _Life and
Correspondence_[434] and the _Letters_[435] to a still greater. The
process is necessary for a historian of criticism, and the results, if
hardly new to him, are interesting enough; but they cannot claim any
exhibition at all correspondent to the time taken in arriving at them.
Nor will any such historian, if he be wise, complain, for Southey is
always delightful, except when he is in his most desperately didactic
moods: and the Goddess of Dulness only knows how even the most egregious
of her children, unless from pure ignorance, has managed to fix on him
the title of “dull.”

[Sidenote: _General characteristics of his Criticism._]

That “a man’s criticism is the man himself” is almost truer than the
original bestowal of the phrase; and it is nowhere truer than with
Southey. That astonishing and almost godlike _sanity_ which
distinguished him, in almost all cases save as regards the
_Anti-Jacobin_, Mr Pitt, the Roman Catholic Church, and my Lord Byron
(who, by the way, lacked it quite as conspicuously in regard to
Southey), is the constant mark of his critical views. Except his
over-valuation of Kirke White,[436] which was undoubtedly due to his
amiable and lifelong habit of helping lame dogs, I cannot, at the moment
or on reflection, think of any critical estimate of his (for that of
himself as a poet is clearly out of the question) which is flagrantly
and utterly wrong; and I can think of hundreds which are triumphantly
right. In respect of older literature, in particular,[437] his
catholicity is free from the promiscuousness of Leigh Hunt, and his
eclecticism from the caprice of Charles Lamb: while, prejudiced as he
can be, I do not remember an instance in which prejudice blinds or
blunts his critical faculty as it does Hazlitt’s. On all formal points
of English poetry he is very nearly impeccable. He may have learnt his
belief in substitution and equivalence from Coleridge; but it is
remarkable that his defences of it to Wynn[438] are quite early, quite
original, and quite sound, while Coleridge’s own account long after, in
the preface to _Christabel_, is vague and to some extent incorrect. He
knew, of course, far more literary history than any one of his
contemporaries—an incalculable advantage—and he could, sometimes at
least, formulate general critical maxims well worth the registering.

[Sidenote: _Reviews._]

Of his regular critical work, however, which can be traced in the
_Annual_ and _Quarterly Reviews_ from the list given by his son at the
end of the _Life_, some notice must be taken, though the very list
itself is a tell-tale in the large predominance of Travels, Histories,
and the like over pure literature. That he should have made a rule for
himself after he became Laureate not to review poetry (save in what may
be called an eleemosynary manner) is merely what one would have expected
from his unvarying sense of propriety; but there were large ranges of
_belles lettres_ to which this did not apply. The articles which will
best repay the looking up are, in the _Annual_, those on _Gebir_,
Godwin’s _Chaucer_, Ritson’s _Romances_, Hayley, Froissart, _Sir
Tristram_, Ellis’s _Specimens_, Todd’s _Spenser_, and _Ossian_; in the
_Quarterly_, those on Chalmers’s _Poets_, Sayers, Hayley again, Camoens,
and Lope de Vega, with some earlier ones on Montgomery (James, not
Robert).[439]

[Sidenote: The Doctor.]

_The Doctor_ also must have its special animadversion, for this
strangely neglected and most delightful book is full of critical matter.
Its showers of mottoes—star-showers from the central glowing mass of
Southey’s enormous and never “dead” reading—amount almost in themselves
to a critical education for any mind which is fortunate enough to be
exposed to them when young, while the saturation of the whole book with
literature can hardly fail to produce the same effect. It is lamentable,
astonishing, and (the word is not too strong) rather disgraceful that,
except the “Three Bears” story, the appendix on the Cats, and perhaps
the beautiful early passages on the Doctor’s birthplace and family, the
book should be practically unknown. But it by no means owes its whole
critical value to these borrowed and reset jewels. The passages of
original criticism—direct or slightly “applied”—which it contains are
numerous and important. The early accounts of the elder Daniel’s
library[440] and of Textor’s dialogues[441] are valuable; the passage on
“Taste and Pantagruelism”[442] much more so. On Sermons,[443] on
Drayton,[444] on the Principles of Criticism,[445] on the famous
verse-tournament of the Poitiers Flea,[446] on the Reasons for
Anonymity,[447] on Mason[448] (for whom Southey manages to say a good
word), on Bowdlerising and Modernising, and (by an easy transition)
Spenser[449]—the reader will find nuggets, and sometimes whole pockets,
of critical gold, the last-mentioned being one of the richest of all. It
is to Southey’s immortal honour (an honour not sufficiently paid him by
some Blakites) that he recognised and quoted at length[450] the
magnificent “Mad Song,” which is perhaps Blake’s most sustained and
unbroken piece of pure poetry. His discussion on Styles[451] is of great
value: while the long account[452] of the plays of Langeveldt
(Macropedius), and of our kindred English Morality _Everyman_, shows how
admirably his more than once projected Literary Histories would have
been executed.

[Sidenote: _Altogether somewhat_ impar sibi.]

Still, I am bound to say that he conveys to my mind the impression of
not quite having his soul bound up in the exercise of his critical
function. He was a little too fond of extending his love of books to
those which, as Lamb would say, are no books—of giving the children’s
bread unto dogs. Occasionally, moreover, that want of the highest
enthusiasm and sympathy, the highest inspiration, which—after the rather
ungracious and ungrateful suggestion of Coleridge—it has been usual to
urge against him, and which cannot be wholly disproved, does appear.
Some would say that this was due to his enormous reading, and to the
penal servitude for life to what was mostly hack-work, which fate and
his own matchless sense of duty imposed upon him. I do not think so; but
of course if it be said that no one with the more translunary fancies,
the nobler gusts, could have so enslaved himself, an authority[453] who
takes so high a ground must be allowed his splendid say. Anyhow, and on
the whole, we must return to the position that Southey does not hold a
very high position among English critics, and that it is easier to give
plausible reasons for the fact than entirely to understand it.[454]

[Sidenote: _Lamb._]

In criticising the criticism of Charles Lamb[455] one has to walk
warily; for is he not one of the most justly beloved of English writers,
and are not lovers apt to love more well than wisely? I shall only say
that if any be an “Agnist,” I more. Ever since I can remember reading
anything (the circumstance would not have seemed trivial to himself), I
have read and revelled in, and for nearly forty years I have possessed
in fee, a copy of the original _Elia_ of 1823, in the black morocco coat
which it put on, at least seven years before Lamb’s death, in 1827. I
have also read its contents, and all other attainable _Agnalia_, in
every edition in which I have come across them, with introductions by
“Thaunson and Jaunson,” in and on all sorts of shapes and types and
papers and bindings. I have never wearied of reading them; I am sure I
never shall weary as long as eye and brain last. That Lamb is one of the
most exquisite and delightful of critics, as of writers, is a
proposition for which I will go to the stake; but I am not prepared to
confess him as one of the very greatest in his critical capacity.

[Sidenote: _His “occultism”_]

The reasons for this limitation are to be found in two passages of his
friend Hazlitt—a ruthless friend enough, but one who seldom goes wrong
in speaking of friend or foe, unless under the plain influence of a
prejudice which here had not the slightest reason for existing. The
passages (referred to again elsewhere) are that on “the Occult School”
in the “Criticism”[456] and one in the “Farewell.”[457] The first speaks
of those “who discern no beauties but what are concealed from
superficial eyes, and overlook all that are obvious to the vulgar part
of mankind.” “If an author is utterly unreadable they can read him for
ever.” “They will no more share a book than a mistress with a friend.”
“Nothing goes down with them but what is caviare to the multitude,” &c.
The other, in which Lamb is actually named, contrasts his “surfeit of
admiration,” the antiquation of his favourites after some ten years,
with the “continuity of impression” on which Hazlitt prided himself.

[Sidenote: _and alleged inconstancy._]

I am inclined to think that both these charges—made with what is (for
the author) perfect good-humour, and only in the first case slightly
exaggerated, as was almost permissible when he was dealing ostensibly
with a type not a person—are quite true. One would not indeed have them
false; it would be most “miserably wise” economy to exchange Lamb, as he
is, for a wilderness of consistent, equitable, catholic mediocrities. As
Hazlitt himself admits, _this_ “Occult Criticism” does not or need not
come from any affectation or love of singularity: indeed, some occult
critics “smack of genius and are worth any money.” The Lothario part of
the indictment, the desertion after enjoyment, is perhaps less easy to
authenticate as well as to defend; but I think it existed, and was
indeed a necessary consequence of the other tendency. If you love merely
or mainly as a collector, and for rarity,—if not only thus but because
others do _not_,—the multiplication of the object or of the taste must
necessarily have a disgusting effect. “The bloom is _off_ the rye.” And
I should say that, beyond all reasonable question, there is a distinct
character of _eccentricity_ in the strict sense, of whim, of
will-worship, about many, if not most, of Lamb’s preferences. There is
no affectation about him; but there is what might be affectation in
another man, and has been affectation in many and many another. Take the
most famous instances of his criticism—the defence of Congreve and
Wycherley, the exaltation of Ford, the saying (productive of endless
tribulation to the matter-of-fact) that Heywood is “a prose
Shakespeare,” the enthusiasm shown towards that rather dull-fantastic
play _A Fair Quarrel_, while the magnificence of the same author’s
_Changeling_ was left to Leigh Hunt to find out—these and other things
distinctly show the _capriccio_. Lamb, not Hunt, is really the “Ariel of
Criticism,” and he sometimes pushes tricksiness to a point which would,
we fear, have made his testy Highness of Milan rather angry. It was
probably in conversation rather than in writing that his fickleness
showed itself: we can never conceive Lamb _writing_ down anything that
he had ever written up. But something of disillusionment must, as has
been said, almost necessarily have resulted from the peculiarly
whimsical character of his inamoration. Canon Ainger has noted, as the
distinguishing features of Lamb’s critical power, “width and
versatility.” One differs with the Master[458] of the Temple unwillingly
and _suo periculo_: but neither term seems to me quite appropriate.
“Width” implies continuity, and there is little of this in Lamb:
“versatility” implies a power of turning to what you will, and Lamb, I
think, loved, not as he would but as he could not help it at the time.

[Sidenote: _The early Letters._]

But he wants nothing save method and certainty (in response—not even
this in touch), and he has critical graces of his own which make him all
but as great as Coleridge or Hazlitt, and perhaps more delightful than
either. In his very earliest critical utterances, in the Letters to
Coleridge and Southey especially, much of this delightfulness displays
itself as well as its two parents—Lamb’s unconquerable originality of
thought and feeling, and his unsurpassable quaintness and piquancy of
phrase. The critic is, as is inevitable from his youth, and from the as
yet very imperfect reading which he frankly confesses, a little
uncertain and inadequate. His comparative estimates of Coleridge and
Southey, Southey and Milton, Southey and Cowper, and of all or most of
these poets and others in themselves, exhibit an obviously unregulated
compass—a tendency to correct impression rather overmuch, because the
first striking off of it has been hasty. But this soon disappears: and
though the eccentricity above noted rather increases than lessens with
years, the critic’s real virtues—those just indicated—appear ever and
ever more distinctly and more delightfully.

[Sidenote: _The_ Specimens.]

In a certain sense they never appear to greater advantage than in the
brief notes included in the _Specimens of Dramatic Poets_ (1808).
Everything necessary to excite Lamb’s critical excellence united here,—
actual merit, private interest (for, though the study of the minor as
well as of the major Elizabethans had been progressing steadily, and
“Dodsley” had gone through several editions, yet the authors were
caviare to the general still); presence of the highest excellence; and,
as we see from the _Letters_, years of familiarity and fondness on the
part of the critic.

The _Notes_ themselves pretend to no method, and fulfil their pretence
very strictly. Lamb is distinctly inferior to both his great friends and
rivals in _grasp_. His appreciation is tangential—though in a different
sense from that in which Hazlitt applies the word to Coleridge. Lamb is
not so much desultory or divagatory as apt to touch his subject only at
one (sometimes one very small) point. The impact results in a spark of
the most ardent heat and glowing light, but neither heat nor light
_spreads_ much. Sometimes, as is inevitable in this style of criticism,
he can be only disappointing: one is inclined to be pettish with him for
seeing nothing to notice in the vast and shadowy sweep of _Tamburlaine_
save an interesting evidence that Pistol was not merely jesting. Nor is
perhaps Barabbas “a mere monster brought in with a large painted nose to
please the rabble.” But you must get out of this mood if you are to
enjoy Lamb. How he makes it all up, and more than up, on _Faustus_, and
(when he comes to Dekker) on _Old Fortunatus_! “Beware! beware!” is the
cry here also, lest we steal too much of his honeydew. Fortunately it
has been so widely used, even for the vulgar purpose of sweetening
school-editions, that it has become generally accessible. The famous
passage on the Witches, which Hazlitt loved to quote, is perhaps as
characteristic as any: the Webster and Chapman notices are perhaps
critically the best.

Next in order of time come the articles contributed to the _Reflector_,
especially the magnificent paper on “The Tragedies of Shakespeare” and
their actableness. I may be prejudiced in favour of this, by caring
myself infinitely to read the drama, and not caring at all to see it
acted; but this objection could not be made to Lamb, who was notoriously
a playgoer, and an eager though unfortunate aspirant to the honours of
the boards. The piece, of course, shows some traces of the _capriccio_,—
especially in the confession of being utterly unable to appreciate “To
be or not to be,” because of its being “spouted.” Shakespeare himself
might have taught Lamb better, in a certain passage about age and
custom. To learn, to hear, nay, direst curse of all! to _teach_ “To be
or not to be” leaves it perfect Cleopatra. But Lamb must be Lamb and
keep his Lambish mind: and he keeps it here to great purpose. The _Lear_
passage, the best known and the most generally admitted as forcible, is
not more so than those on the _Tempest_ and on _Macbeth_. They all come
to that position of the true critic (as I believe it to be), which has
been indicated elsewhere, that drama _may_ be literature but is not
bound to be—that they are different things, and that the points which
drama need not have, and perhaps to which it cannot do full justice, are
in literature of the greatest importance.

[Sidenote: _The Garrick Play Notes._]

It is natural, though they were written so long afterwards, to take the
“Notes on the Garrick Plays” with these other forerunners and
suggesters; nor do I think that so much of the “first sprightly running”
is lost as has sometimes been thought. How Lamb-like and how pleasant is
the phrase on Day’s quaint _Parliament of Bees_—“the very air seems
replete with humming and buzzing melodies.” (Most obvious, of course:
only that nobody had _met_ it before!) And the imploration to Novello to
set the song from Peele’s _Arraignment_; and the fine and forcible plea
for the minor Elizabethans in the note to _The Two Angry Women of
Abingdon_ (a play, by the way, every fresh reading of which makes one
more thoroughly agree with Lamb). The fewness and slightness of these
notes should not be allowed to obscure their quality.

[Sidenote: _Miscellaneous Essays._]

It was seldom that the bee-like nature of Lamb’s own genius could settle
long on a single flower; and his regular “studies” are few, and not
always of his very best. The actual state of the paper on _The
Excursion_, after its mangling by Gifford, illustrates the wisdom of
that editorial counsel, “Always keep a copy,” which the contributor
(alas! we are all guilty) doth so unwisely neglect; and the two best
that we have among the miscellaneous essays are those on Wither and on
Defoe’s secondary novels. It is difficult to say which is the better:
but the singular unlikeness of the two subjects (except that both Wither
and Defoe are eminently _homely_) shows what I presume Canon Ainger
meant by the “versatility” of the critic’s genius. Both are admirable,
but most characteristically “promiscuous.” The Defoe piece avowedly
gives stray notes; but the “Wither,” though it has a beginning, has very
little middle, and no end at all.

[Sidenote: Elia.]

As for _Elia_ itself, it is fortunately too well known to need any
analysis or much detailed survey. In the first and more famous
collection the literary element is rather a saturation than a separable
contingent. Except the “Artificial Comedy” paper, there is none with a
definitely literary title or ostensible subject: while this itself
starts in the closest connection with the preceding paper on Actors, and
is dramatic rather than literary. But the “saturation” is unmistakable.
As one turns the beloved and hundred-times-read pages, the constant
undercurrent of allusion to books and reading strikes one none the less—
perhaps indeed the more—for familiarity, whether it is at some depth, as
in places, or whether it bubbles up to and over the surface, as in
“Oxford in the Vacation,” and the book-borrowing close of “The Two Races
of Men,” and that other close of that “New Year’s Eve” which so
unnecessarily fluttered Southey’s orthodoxy, and not a little of “All
Fool’s Day”; and in quotations everywhere. But in the _Last Essays_ Lamb
exhibits the master-passion much more openly. The “Detached Thoughts on
Books and Reading” of course lays all concealment aside,—it is a regular
_affiche_, as are also “The Genteel Style in Writing” and (most of all)
“On Some Sonnets of Sir Philip Sidney”—the valiant and triumphant sally
against Hazlitt—with not a little of “Old China” itself. Everywhere
there is evident the abiding, unfailing love of “the book.”

[Sidenote: _The later_ Letters.]

And if we recur to the _Letters_ we shall find the most abundant proof
of this quality. How admirable are those criticisms[459] of the second
edition of _Lyrical Ballads_ which, because they are not “neat” praise,
roused the poetic irritability, not merely of Wordsworth, whose views
respecting the reception of his own verse were always Athanasian, but of
Coleridge, who had, at any rate, intervals of self-perception! How sound
the judgment of Mrs Barbauld and of Chapman (a pleasing pair) to
Coleridge himself on Oct. 23, 1802![460] How sure the touch of the
finger on that absurdity in Godwin’s _Chaucer_ which has been so
frequently copied since, “the fondness for filling out the picture by
supposing what Chaucer did and how he felt”![461] The choicest of his
observations are naturally those to Coleridge, almost _passim_: but the
vein is so irrepressible that he indulges it even in writing to
Wordsworth, though he knew perfectly well that the most favourable
reception could only be a mild wonder that people could think or talk of
any literature, and especially any poetry, other than “W. W.’s” own.
Even his experiences in 1800 could not prevent him from handling[462]
the Poems of 1815 with the same “irreverent _parrhesia_” which he uses
immediately after[463] also to Southey on _Roderick_ as compared with
_Kehama_ and _Madoc_. His famous appreciation of Blake[464] (of whom
'tis pity that he knew no more) is one of the capital examples of
pre-established harmony between subject and critic. That he could not,
on the other hand, like Shelley, is not unsusceptible of explanations by
no means wholly identical, though partly, with those which account for
Hazlitt’s error. Lamb did not like the word “unearthly” (he somewhere
objects to its use) and he did not like the thing unearthliness. The
regions where, as Mr Arnold has it, “thin, thin, the pleasant human
noises sound,” were not his haunt. Now Blake always has a homely
domestic everyday side close to his wildest prophetisings,[465] and
Shelley has not. On the other hand, how completely does he grasp even
Cervantes in the few _obiter dicta_ to Southey on Aug. 19, 1825,[466]
and how instantly he seizes the “charm one cannot explain” in _Rose
Aylmer_.[467] And his very last letter concerns a book, and a book on
poetry, Phillips’s _Theatrum Poetarum_.

[Sidenote: _Uniqueness of Lamb’s critical style_]

His love was, as we said, “of the book,” perhaps, rather than, as in
Hazlitt’s case, “of literature.” The Advocatus Diaboli may once more
suggest that to Lamb the book was a very little too much on a level with
the tea-pot and the engraving—that he had a shade in excess of the
collector’s feeling about him. But the Court will not call upon the
learned gentleman to say anything more on that head. It is time to
acknowledge, without reservations or provisos, the unique quality of
“Elia’s” critical appreciation. Very much of this quality—if a quality
be separable into parts—arises from his extraordinary command of
phrase,—the phrase elaborate without affectation, borrowed yet
absolutely individual and idiosyncratic, mannered to the _n_th, but
never mannerised, in which, though he might not have attained to it
without his great seventeenth-century masters, he stands original and
alone. In no critic perhaps—not even in Mr Pater—does style count for so
much as in Lamb; in none certainly is it more distinctive, and, while
never monotonous, more homogeneous, uniform, instantly recognisable and
self-bewrayed. The simulative power—almost as of the leaf-insect and
suchlike creatures—with which he could imitate styles, is of course most
obvious in the _tour de force_ of the Burton counterfeits. But in his
best and most characteristic work it is not this which we see, but
something much nobler, though closely allied to it. It is not Browne, or
Fuller, or Burton, or Glanvill, but something like them, yet different.
And though it has more _outré_ presentation in some of his miscellaneous
writing than in his criticism, yet it is never absent in the most
striking pieces of this, and gives them much of their hold on us.

[Sidenote: _and thought._]

Still, those who, however unnecessarily (for no one surely is going to
deny it save in a mood of paradox or of monomania), insist that style
must be the body of thought—nay, that this body itself must think (in
Donne’s phrase), and not merely live, will find no difficulty in
claiming Lamb as theirs. Nothing of the kind is more curious than the
fact that, strongly marked as are his peculiarities and much as he may
himself have imitated, he is not imitable; nobody has ever, except in
the minutest shreds—rather actually torn off from his motley than
reproducing it—written in Lamb’s style save Lamb. And accordingly no one
(though not a few have tried) has ever criticised like Lamb. It is very
easy to be capricious, fantastic, fastidious—as easy as to wear yellow
stockings and go cross-gartered, and as effective. To Lamb’s critical
attitude there go in the first place that love for the book which has
been spoken of; then that faculty of sound, almost common-sense, “taste”
which is shown in the early letters to Coleridge and Southey; then the
reading of years and decades; and, lastly, the _je ne sais quoi_ that
“fondoos” the other things, as the old Oxford story has it—a story to be
constantly borne in mind by the critic and the historian of
criticism.[468] Even the other ingredients are not too common,
especially in conjunction: the _je ne sais quoi_ itself is here, and
nowhere else.

[Sidenote: _Leigh Hunt: his somewhat inferior position._]

Leigh Hunt[469] claims less space from us than either of his friends
Hazlitt and Lamb. This is not because he is an inconsiderable critic,
for he is by no means this. As has been said, he has the immense and
surprising credit of having first discovered the greatness of the tragic
part of Middleton’s _Changeling_, as an individual exploit, and in more
general ways he has that, which Macaulay duly recognised in a well-known
passage,[470] of being perhaps more _catholic_ in his tastes as regards
English Literature than any critic up to his time. He has left a very
large range of critical performance, which is very rarely without taste,
acuteness, and felicity of expression; and he has, as against both the
greater critics just named, the very great advantage of possessing a
competent knowledge of at least one modern literature[471] besides his
own, and some glimmerings of others. He has the further deserts of being
almost always readable, of diffusing a pleasant sunny atmosphere, and of
doing very much to keep up the literary side of that periodical
production which, for good or for evil, was, with the novel, the great
literary feature of the nineteenth century. These are not small merits:
and while they might seem greater if they were not thrown somewhat into
the shade by the superior eminence of Coleridge and Hazlitt, and the
superior attractiveness of Lamb, they retain, even in the vicinity of
these, claims to full acknowledgment.

[Sidenote: _Reasons for it._]

A severely critical estimate, however, will discover in Leigh Hunt—
perhaps in very close juxtaposition and in a sort of causal relation to
these merits themselves—something which is not quite so good. Even his
catholicity may be set down in part, by the Enemy, to a certain loose
facility of liking, an absence of fastidiousness and selection. If Lamb
goes too far towards the ends of the English literary earth for the
objects of his affection, Hunt is rather too content to find them _in
triviis et angiportis_. He does not exactly “like grossly,” but he likes
a little promiscuously. The fault is no very bad one; and it becomes
exceedingly venial—nay, a positive virtue in time and circumstance—when
we compare it with the unreasonable exclusiveness of the Neo-classic
period. But it is a kind of criticism which inclines rather too much to
the uncritical.

[Sidenote: _His attitude to Dante._]

A further objection may be taken by applying that most dangerous of all
tests, the question “What does he _dis_like?” For the twentieth time
(probably) let us repeat that in criticism likes and dislikes are free;
and that the man who, however unfortunately, still honestly dislikes
what the consensus of good criticism approves, is entitled to say so,
and had much better say so. But he gives his reasons, descends upon
particulars, at his peril. Leigh Hunt, to do him justice, is not like Mr
Rymer—it is not his habit “no wise to allow.” But it is certainly a pity
that one of his exceptions should be Dante, and it is certainly a much
greater pity that among the reasons given for unfavourable
criticism[472] should be because Dante “puts fabulous people with real
among the damned,” because Purgatory is such a very disagreeable idea,
and because the whole poem contains “absurdities too obvious nowadays to
need remark.”

This, however, was merely an exceptional outburst of that “Liberal”
Philistinism and blundering which, it is only fair to say, had been
provoked by plentiful exhibition of the same qualities on the other
side, and which was more particularly excusable in Leigh Hunt (humanly,
if not critically, speaking), because nobody, not even Hazlitt, had
received worse treatment from that side than himself. But it does
something affect his critical position; for even Hazlitt managed, in
some queer fashion, to distinguish between the prostitute baronet, Sir
Walter Scott, and “the Author of _Waverley_,” between that wicked Mr
Burke and the author of the great speeches and treatises. But the main
reasons why Hunt must go with shorter measure than others, is the
combination of abundance in quantity with a certain want of distinction
in quality, which mars his writings. Not even the largest space here
possible would enable us to go through them all, and we should be able
to select but a few that are of unquestionably distinctive and
characteristic _race_. It is, indeed, rather in his favour that you may
dip almost anywhere into him with the certainty of a wholesome,
pleasant, and refreshing critical bath or draught. He is very rarely
untrustworthy; and when he is, as in the _Dante_ case, he tells the fact
and its secret more frankly even than Hazlitt himself. But it would be
unjust to refer to no samples of him, and a few of the most
characteristic shall therefore be given.

[Sidenote: _Examples from_ Imagination and Fancy.]

Fortunately there is an extremely favourable example of his criticism
which fills a whole book to itself, and is written under something like
a general scheme. This is the volume—modestly sub-titled “Selections,”
but containing a very large proportion of comment and original matter—
which he called _Imagination and Fancy_,[473] and intended to follow up
with four others, though only one, _Wit and Humour_,[474] was ever
written. The plan was begun late (1844); but as we have seen in almost
every instance, a man’s critical work very rarely declines with years,
unless he actually approaches dotage: and the book is, on the whole, not
merely the most favourable but the most representatively favourable
example of Leigh Hunt’s criticism. It opens by a set Essay on the
question “What is Poetry?” from which, perhaps, any one who knew the
author’s other work, but not this, might not expect very much, for Hunt
had not an abstract or philosophical head. He acquits himself, however,
remarkably well. His general definition that Poetry is “the utterance of
a passion for truth, beauty, and power, embodying and illustrating its
conceptions by imagination and fancy, and modulating its language on the
principle of variety in uniformity,” is not bad; but these things are
never very satisfactory. It will be seen that Hunt, like Coleridge,
though with a less “Cimmerian” obscurity of verbiage, “dodges” the frank
mention of “metre” or “verse”; but this is not because he is in any way
inclined to compromise. On the contrary, he says[475] (taking, and
perhaps designedly, the very opposite line to Wordsworth) that he “knows
of no very fine versification unaccompanied with fine poetry.” But the
strength of the “Essay,” as of the whole book, is in the abundant and
felicitous illustration of the various points of this definition by
commented selections from the poets themselves.

That catholicity which has been said to be his main critical virtue will
be found (without any of the vice which has been hinted as sometimes
accompanying it) in the very list of the authors selected from—Spenser,
Marlowe, Shakespeare, Jonson, Beaumont and Fletcher, Middleton, Dekker,
and Webster, Milton, Coleridge, Shelley, and Keats: while the less
“imaginative” poets are by no means neglected, and in particular Leigh
Hunt brings out, often as no one had ever done before, that sheer
poetical quality of Dryden to which the critics of 1800-1830 had been as
a rule unjust. But the comment (and one cannot say more) is usually
worthy of the selection. The fullest division of all is that on Spenser—
indeed Leigh Hunt’s appreciation of this at once exquisite and
magnificent poet is one of the very best we have, and would be the best
of all if it had been a little more sensitive to Spenser’s “brave_st_
translunary things,” to the pervading exaltation and sublimation of
thought and feeling which purifies the most luscious details, and unites
the most straggling divagations in a higher unity. But, short of this,
it would be difficult to have a better detailed eulogium, _pièces en
main_, of the subject; nor does Hunt fail to make out something of a
case against, at least, the exaggeration of Lessing’s attack on the _ut
pictura poesis_ view. But his limitations appear in his complete
misunderstanding of Coleridge’s exact and profound observation that
Spenser’s descriptions are “not in the true sense of the word
_picturesque_, but composed of a wondrous series of images as in
dreams.” What Coleridge meant, of course, is that sequence rather than
strict “composition” is Spenser’s secret—that his pageants _dissolve
into_ one another. But in these finesses Hunt is seldom at his ease. So,
again, he blasphemes one of the most beautiful lines of _The Tempest_—

              “The fringed curtains of thine eye advance”—

as “elaborate nothingness, not to say nonsense” [how nothingness can in
any case be sense he shall tell us], “pompous,” “declamatory,” and
disapproved of by—Pope!

One really blushes for him. Could he possibly be unaware that when a
person is about to look at anything, the natural gesture is to lower the
head and thrust it a little forward, raising or depressing the eyelids
at the same time? or be insensible to the exquisite profile image of
Miranda with the long eyelashes projected against the air? And he was
the author of _A Criticism of Female Beauty_! But if he sometimes
misunderstands, he seldom misses good things such as (it is true Warton
put him on this) the Medea passage of Gower.[476] Ben Jonson made him
uncomfortable, which is again a pity; and on Beaumont and Fletcher he is
at almost his very worst: but he is sounder than some greater ones on
Ford and Massinger, and his great “catch” of De Flores deserves yet a
third mention. He is at his very best and pleasantest, too, where most
men fail—where they are even often very _un_pleasant—on his
contemporaries, Coleridge, and Shelley, and Keats. When you have said
such a thing as this[477] of Coleridge, “Of pure poetry, ... consisting
of nothing but its essential self, ... he was the greatest master of his
time,” you had better “stand down.” Your critical claim is made out: you
may damage but can hardly increase it. Yet it is only in the severe
court of critical history that one would wish to silence Hunt: for, in
truth, nine-tenths of his criticism is admirable, and most admirably
suited to instruct and encourage the average man. Impressionism and
Rulelessness are almost as fairly justified of him, their child, as of
any other that I can think of. They scarcely ever lead him wrong in
liking; and he mentions what he dislikes so seldom that he has only
occasional chances of being wrong there.

[Sidenote: _Hazlitt._]

But the greatest of the “Cockney critics” (_quelle Cocaigne!_) has yet
to come. There is “a company of warm young men,” as Dryden has it, who
would doubtless disdain the inquiry whether Coleridge or Hazlitt is the
greatest of English critics; and it is quite certain that this inquiry
might be conducted in a sufficiently futile sense and manner. There are
others, less disdainful, who might perhaps be staggered by the
acknowledgment _in limine_ that it is possible to answer the question
either way—nay, for the same person to give both answers, and yet be
“not unwelcome back again” as a reasonable disputant. I have myself in
my time, I think, committed myself to both propositions; and I am not at
all disposed to give up either—for reasons which it will be more proper
to give at the end than at the beginning of an examination of Hazlitt
himself. That he was a great critic there will probably now be little
dispute, though Goethe is said not to have found much good in him;
though persons of worship, including Mr Stevenson, have thought him
greater as a miscellaneous essayist; and though you may read writings of
considerable length upon him in which no attempt is made to bring out
his critical character at all.

[Sidenote: _Method of dealing with him._]

His critical deliverances are so numerous and so voluminous that the
“brick of the house” process, which we have frequently found applicable,
has in his case to be given up, or at least considerably modified—for it
is too much the principle of the present History to be given up
altogether. Fortunately there is no difficulty in the modification.
Hazlitt is not, like Coleridge, remarkable for the discovery and
enunciation of any one great critical principle, or for the emission
(_obiter_ or otherwise) of remarkable mediate _dicta_, or for
_marginalia_ on individual passages or lines, though sometimes he can do
the last and sometimes also the second of these things. What he is
remarkable for is his extraordinary fertility and felicity, as regards
English literature, in judgments, more or less “grasped,” of individual
authors, books, or pieces. As, by preference, he stops at the passage,
and does not descend to the individual line or phrase, so, by preference
also,[478] he stops at the individual example of the Kind, and does not
ascend to the Kind itself, or at least is not usually very happy in his
ascension. But within these limits (and they are wide enough), the
fertility and the felicity of his criticism are things which strike one
almost dumb with admiration; and this in spite of certain obvious and in
their way extremely grave faults.

The most obvious, though by far the least, of these,—indeed one which is
displayed with such frankness and in a way so little delusive as to be
hardly a fault at all, though it is certainly a drawback,—is a sort of
audacious sciolism—acquiescence in ignorance, indifference about
“satisfying the examiners”—for half a dozen different names would be
required to bring out all the sides of it.

[Sidenote: _His surface and occasional faults: Imperfect knowledge and
           method._]

His almost entire ignorance of all literatures but his own gives him no
trouble, though it cannot be said that it does him no harm. In treating
of comic writers, not in English only but generally, he says[479] (with
perfect truth) that Aristophanes and Lucian are two of the four chief
names for comic humour, but that he shall say little of them, for he
knows little. Would all men were as honest! but one cannot say, “Would
all critics were as ignorant!” In his _Lectures on the English Poets_ he
is transparently, and again quite honestly, ignorant of mostly all the
earlier minorities, with some not so minor. He almost prided himself
upon not reading anything in the writing period of his life; and he
seems to have carried out his principles so conscientiously that, if
anything occurred in the course of a lecture which was unknown to him,
he never made the slightest effort to supply the gap. His insouciance in
method was equal to that in regard to material; and when we find[480]
Godwin and Mrs Radcliffe included, with no satiric purpose, among “The
English Comic Writers,” they are introduced so naturally that the
absurdity hardly strikes us till some accident wakes us up to it. If
inaccuracies in matters of fact are not very common in him, it is
because, like a true critic, he pays very little attention to such
matters, and is wholly in opinion and appreciation and judgment, and
other things where the free spirit is kept straight, if at all, by its
own instinct. But he does commit such inaccuracies, and would evidently
commit many more if he ran the risk of them oftener.

[Sidenote: _Extra-literary prejudice._]

The last and gravest of his drawbacks has to be mentioned, and though it
may be slurred over by political partisanship, those who admire and
exalt him in spite of and not because of his politics, are well entitled
to call attention to it. To the unpleasantness of Hazlitt’s personal
temper we have the unchallengeable testimony of his friends Lamb, who
was the most charitable, and Hunt, who with all his faults was one of
the most good-natured, of mortals. But what we may call his political
temper, especially when it was further exasperated by his personal, is
something of the equal of which no time leaves record. Whenever this
east wind blows, the true but reasonable Hazlittian had better, speaking
figuratively, “go to bed till it is over,” as John Hall Stevenson is
said to have done literally in the case of the literal Eurus. Not only
does Hazlitt then cease to be a critic,—he ceases to be a rational
being. Sidney and Scott are the main instances of its effect, because
Sidney could not have annoyed, and Scott we know did not in any way
annoy, Hazlitt personally. Gifford is not in this case, and he was
himself so fond of playing at the roughest of bowls that nobody need
pity him for the rubbers he met. But Hazlitt’s famous _Letter_ to him,
which some admire, always, I confess, makes me think of the
Doll’s-dressmaker’s father’s last fit of the horrors in _Our Mutual
Friend_, and of the way in which the luckless “man talent” fought with
the police and “laid about him hopelessly, fiercely, staringly,
convulsively, foamingly.” Fortunately the effect was not so fatal, and I
know no other instance in which Hazlitt actually required the strait
waistcoat.[481] But he certainly did here: and in a considerable number
of instances his prejudices have made him, if not exactly _non compos
mentis_, yet certainly _non compos judicii_.

[Sidenote: _His radical and usual excellence._]

Fortunately, however, the wind does not always blow from this quarter
with him, and when it does the symptoms are so unmistakable that nobody
can be deceived unless he chooses to be, or is so stupid that it really
does not matter whether he is deceived or not. Far more usually it is
set in a bracing North or fertilising West, not seldom even in the
“summer South” itself. And then you get such appreciations, in the best,
the most thorough, the most delightful, the most _valuable_ sense, as
had been seldom seen since Dryden, never before, and in him not
frequently. I do not know in what language to look for a parallel
wealth. Systematic Hazlitt’s criticism very seldom is, and, as hinted
above, still seldomer at its best when it attempts system. But then
system was not wanted; it had been overdone; the patient required a
copious alterative. He received it from Hazlitt as he has—virtue and
quantity combined—received it from no one else since: it is a “patent
medicine” in everything but the presence of quackery. Roughly speaking,
Hazlitt’s criticism is of two kinds. The first is very stimulating, very
interesting, but, I venture to think, the less valuable of the two. In
it Hazlitt at least endeavours to be general, and takes a lesson from
Burke in “prodigious variation” on his subject. The most famous, the
most laboured, and perhaps the best example is the exordium of the
_Lectures on the English Poets_, with its astonishing “amplification” on
what poetry in general is and what it is not. A good deal of this is
directly Coleridgean. I forget whether this is the lecture which
Coleridge himself, when he read it, thought that he remembered “talking
at Lamb’s”; but we may be quite sure that he had talked things very like
it. Much in the “Shakespeare and Milton” has the same quality, and may
have been partly derived from the same source: the critical character of
Pope[482] is another instance, and probably more original. For Hazlitt
had not merely learnt the trick from his master but had himself a genius
for it; and he adorned these disquisitions with more _phrase_ than
Coleridge’s recalcitrant pen usually allowed him, though there seems to
have been plenty in his speech.

The Pope passage is specially interesting, because it leads us to the
second and, as it seems to me, the chief and principal class of
Hazlitt’s critical deliverances—those in which, without _epideictic_
intention, without, or with but a moderate portion of, rhetoric and
amplification and phrasemaking, he handles separate authors and works
and pieces. I have said that I think him here unsurpassed, and perhaps
unrivalled, in the quantity and number of his deliverances, and only
surpassed, _if so_, in their quality, by the greatest things of the
greatest persons. These deliverances are to be found everywhere in his
extensive critical work, and it is of a survey of some of them,
conditioned in the manner outlined above, that the main body of any
useful historical account of his criticism must consist. The four main
places are the Lectures on _The English Poets_ (1818), on _The English
Comic Writers_ (1819), on _Elizabethan Literature_ (1820), and the book
on _Characters of Shakespeare_ (1817). We may take them in the order
mentioned, though it is not quite chronological, because the
chronological dislocation, in the case of the second pair, is logically
and methodically unavoidable.

[Sidenote: The English Poets.]

How thoroughly this examination of the greater particulars (as we may
call it) was the work which he was born to do is illustrated by the
sketches (at the end of the first Lecture on _The English Poets_[483])
of _The Pilgrim’s Progress_, _Robinson Crusoe_, the _Decameron_, Homer,
the Bible, Dante, and (O Groves of Blarney!) _Ossian_. Hazlitt’s faults
(except prejudice, which is here fortunately silent) are by no means
hidden in them—irrelevance, defect of knowledge, “casualness,” and other
not so good things. But the _gusto_,[484] the spirit, the inspiriting
quality, are present in tenfold measure. Here is a man to whom
literature is a real and live thing, and who can make it real and alive
to his readers—a man who does not love it or its individual examples “by
allowance,” but who loves it “with personal love.” Even his
Richardsonian digression[485]—horrible to the stop-watch man—is alive
and real and stimulating with the rest. The Dante passage is a little
false perhaps in parts, inadequate, prejudiced, what you will in others.
But it is criticism—an act of literary faith and hope and charity too—a
substance; something added to, and new-born in, the literary cosmos. He
is better (indeed he is here almost at his very best) on Spenser than on
Chaucer, but why? Because he _knew_ more about Spenser, because he was
plentifully read in sixteenth- and hardly read at all in
fourteenth-century literature. And so always: the very plethora of one’s
notes for comment warning the commentator that he is lost if he indulges
rashly. Where Hazlitt is inadequate (as for instance on Dryden) he is
more instructive than many men’s adequacy could be, and where he is not—
on Collins, on the Ballads, and elsewhere—he prepares us for that
ineffable and half-reluctant outburst—a very Balaam’s blessing—on
Coleridge,[486] which stands not higher than this, not lower than that,
but as an _A-per-se_, consummate and unique.

[Sidenote: _The_ Comic Writers.]

In a sense the _Comic Writers_ are even better. The general exordium on
Wit and Humour belongs to the first class of Hazlitt’s critical
performances as defined above, and is one of the cleverest of them;
though it may perhaps have the faults of its class, and some of those of
its author. That on Comedy—the general part of it—incurs this sentence
in a heavier degree; for Aristotle or somebody else seems to have
impressed Hazlitt too strongly with the necessary _shadiness_ of Comedy,
and it is quite clear that of the Romantic variety (which to be sure
hardly anybody but Shakespeare has ever hit off) he had an insufficient
idea. He is again inadequate on Jonson; it is indeed in his criticism,
because of its very excellence, that we see—more than anywhere else,
though we see it everywhere—the truth of his master’s denunciation of
the “criticism which denies.” But his lecture or essay on the capital
examples of the comedy which he really liked—that of the Restoration—is
again an apex: and, as it happens, it is grouped for English students
with others—the morally excellent and intellectually vigorous but rather
purblind onslaught of Collier, the again vigorous but somewhat
Philistine following thereof by Macaulay, the practical confession of
Lamb’s fantastic and delightful apology, Leigh Hunt’s rather feeble
compromise—after a fashion which shows it off to a marvel. While as to
the chapter on the Eighteenth-century Novel it has, with a worthier
subject, an equal supremacy of treatment. You may differ with much of
it, but always agree to differ: except in that estimate of Lovelace
which unfortunately shows us Hazlitt’s inability to recognise a _cad_ in
the dress and with the manners of a fine gentleman.[487]

[Sidenote: The Age of Elizabeth.]

The _Lectures on the Age of Elizabeth_ (which succeeded the _Comic
Writers_, as these had succeeded the _Poets_) maintain, if they do not
even raise, the standard. Perhaps there is nothing so fine as the
Coleridge passage in individual and concentrated expression; nor any
piece of connected criticism so masterly as the chapter on the Novel.
But the level is higher: and nowhere do we find better expression of
that _gusto_—that amorous quest of literary beauty and rapturous
enjoyment of it—which, has been noted as Hazlitt’s great merit. His
faults are here, as always, with him and with us. Even the faithful Lamb
was driven to expostulate[488] with the wanton and, as it happens, most
uncritical belittlement of Sidney,[489] and (though he himself was
probably less influenced by political partisanship or political feeling
of any kind than almost any great writer of whom we know) to assign this
to its true cause. It is odd[490] that a critic, and a great critic,
should contrive to be inadequate both on Browne and on Dryden: and again
one cannot but suspect the combination to be due to the fact that both
were Royalists. But the King’s Head does not always come in: and it is
only fair to Hazlitt to say that he is less biassed than Coleridge by
the royalism itself of Beaumont and Fletcher, and the supposed
republicanism of Massinger. And in by far the greater part of the book—
nearly the whole of that part of it which deals with the dramatists—
there is no disturbance of this kind. The opening, if somewhat
discursive, is masterly, and with very few exceptions the lecturer or
essayist carries out the admirable motto—in fact and in deed the motto
of all real critics—“I have endeavoured to feel what was good, and to
give a reason for the faith that was in me when necessary and when in my
power.”[491] Two of his sentences, in dealing with Beaumont and
Fletcher, not merely set the key-note of all good criticism but should
open the stop thereof in all fit readers. “It is something worth living
for to write or even read such poetry as this, or to know that it has
been written.” Again, “And so it is something, as our poets themselves
wrote, ‘far above singing.’”[492]

[Sidenote: Characters of Shakespeare.]

The _Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays_ is perhaps not as good as any of
these three courses of Lectures; but it should be remembered that it
came earlier in time, and that the critic had not “got his hand in.” The
notes are as a rule nearly as desultory as Coleridge’s, with less
suggestiveness; there is at least one outburst, in the case of _Henry
V._, of the usual disturbing influence; there is very much more
quotation than there need be from Schlegel; and there are other signs of
the novitiate. Yet the book contains admirable things, as in the early
comparison of Chaucer and Shakespeare, where, though Hazlitt’s defective
knowledge of Chaucer again appears, there is much else good. Among the
_apices_ of Shakespearian criticism is the statement that the poet “has
no prejudice for or against his characters,”[493] that he makes “no
attempt to force an interest: everything is left for time and
circumstance to unfold.”[494] There is perhaps something inconsistent
with this as well as with truth in the observation on _Lear_,[495] that
“He is here fairly caught in the web of his own imagination”; but, like
most of the greater critics, Hazlitt cares very little for superficial
consistency. The characters of Falstaff and Shylock are masterpieces in
his _bravura_ style, and one need perhaps nowhere seriously quarrel with
any critical statement of his except the astonishing one, that _All’s
Well that Ends Well_ is “one of the most _pleasing_” of the plays.

In the remaining volumes the literary articles or passages are only
occasional, and are often considerably adulterated with non-literary
matter. In _The Plain Speaker_, for instance, the opening paper on “The
Prose Style of Poets” holds out almost the highest promise, and gives
almost the lowest performance. Hazlitt, as is not so very uncommon with
him, seems to have deliberately set himself to take the other side from
Coleridge’s. That it happens also to be the wrong side matters very
little. But even his attack on Coleridge’s own prose style (open enough
to objection) has nothing very happy in it except the comparison, “To
read one of his disquisitions is like hearing the variations to a piece
of music without the score.” So, too, “On the Conversation of Authors,”
though intensely interesting, has no critical interest or very little—
the chief exception being the passage on Burke’s style. Far more
important is the glance at the theory of the single word in “On
Application to Study,”[496] and in that in “On Envy”[497] on the taste
of the Lake School.

[Sidenote: The Plain Speaker.]

Much of _The Plain Speaker_ is injured as a treasury of criticism,
though improved as a provision of amusement, by Hazlitt’s personal
revelations, complaints, agonies; but the critical _ethos_ of the man
was so irrepressible that it will not be refused. There is a curious
little piece[498] of critical blasphemy, or at least “dis-_gusto_” (the
word is wanted and is fairly choice Italian), in “On the Pleasure of
Hating,” and, almost throughout the series, the sharp flux and reflux of
literary admiration and political rage in respect of Scott is most
noteworthy. “On the Qualifications necessary to Success in Life”
contains yet another[499] of those passages on Coleridge which are like
nothing so much as the half-fond, half-furious, retrospects of a
discarded lover on his mistress—which are certainly like nothing else in
literature. But “On Reading Old Books” does not belie the promise of its
title, and is a complete and satisfactory palinode to the fit of
critical headache noted just now. One must not venture to cite from it;
it is to be read and re-read, and hardly any single piece, except the
immortal “Farewell to Essay-Writing,” gives us so much insight into
Hazlitt’s critical temperament as this. “On People of Sense” contains
many critical glances, and, unfortunately, one[500] of those on Shelley
which show Hazlitt at his worst. One might think that he who found
others so “far above singing” could not miss the similar altitude of the
author of _Prometheus Unbound_. But Shelley was a contemporary,
something of an acquaintance, a man of some means, a gentleman—so
Hazlitt must snarl[501] at him. Let us sigh and pass.

“Antiquity,” though on one side only, is almost throughout ours, and
therefore not ours: and there is not a little for us in “On Novelty and
Familiarity,” while “Old English Writers and Speakers” speaks for
itself, and is specially interesting for its glances on matters French
and its characteristically Hazlittian fling—one I confess with which I
have for once no quarrel—that “_’Tis pity She’s a Whore_ will no more
act than Lord Byron and Goethe together could have written it.”[502] It
puts one in charity for the absurd description,[503] contradicted by

his own remarks, of _Redgauntlet_s “the last and almost worst” of
Scott’s novels, and the prediction (alas! to be falsified) that “Old Sir
Walter will last long enough”—in the flesh, not in fame.[504] “Scott,
Racine, and Shakespeare” is not unworthy of its title, though it is
really on the first and last only. Racine is brought in perfunctorily,
and justice is done to him in neither sense.

_Table-Talk_, one of the greenest pastures of the Hazlittian champaign
generally, is among the least literary of the books, and yet so literary
enough. “On Genius and Common Sense” contributes its Character of
Wordsworth,[505] on whom Hazlitt is always interesting, because of the
extraordinary opposition between the men’s temperaments. The companion
on Shelley,[506] which is supplied by “On Paradox and Commonplace,” is
hardly less interesting, though, for the reasons above indicated, much
less valuable. “On Milton’s Sonnets,” however, is, as it ought to be, a
pure study and an admirable one.[507] “The Aristocracy of Letters”
carries its hay high on the horn, yet it is not negligible: and “On
Criticism,” which follows, really deserves the title, despite its
frequent and inevitable flings and runnings-amuck. The good-humoured,
though rather “home” description of “the Occult School”[508] (_v. supra_
on Lamb) is perfectly just. “On Familiar” Style is also no false
promiser, and yet another passage on Coleridge meets us in the paper “On
Effeminacy of Character.”

[Sidenote: The Round Table, _&c._]

Nor is the interesting “omnibus” volume, which takes its general title
from _The Round Table_, of the most fertile. The collection of short
papers, properly so called, was written earlier (1817) than most of the
books hitherto discussed, and therefore has some first drafts or
variants of not a little that is in them. In a note of it[509] occurs
the passage on Burke, which, with that on Scott in the _Spirit of the
Age_, is Hazlitt’s nearest approach to the sheer _delirium tremens_ of
the Gifford Letter: but he is not often thus. “The Character of Milton’s
Eve” is a fine critical paper of its kind, and “takes the taste out”
well after the passage on Burke. The long handling of _The Excursion_ is
very interesting to compare with that in the _English Poets_, as is the
earlier “Midsummer Night’s Dream” with similar things elsewhere.
“Pedantry” and others give something: and though no human being
(especially no human being who knows both books) has ever discovered
what made Hazlitt call _John Buncle_ “the English Rabelais,” the paper
on Amory’s queer novel is a very charming one. “On the Literary
Character” does somewhat deceive us: “Commonplace Critics” less so: but
to “Poetical Versatility” we must return. Of the remaining contents of
the volume, the well-known _Conversations with Northcote_ (where the
painter plays Hazlitt’s idea of an Advocatus Diaboli on Hazlitt) gives
less still. But there is a striking passage on Wordsworth,[510] a
paradox (surely?) on Tom Paine[511] as “a fine writer” (you might as
well call a good getter of coal at the face “a fine sculptor”), an
interesting episode[512] on early American nineteenth-century
literature; and not a few others, especially the profound self-criticism
(for no doubt Northcote had nothing to do with it) on Hazlitt’s
abstinence from society.[513] In _Characteristics_, one of the few
notable collections of the kind in English, CCXC, a most curious and
pretty certainly unconscious echo of Aristotle,[514] is our best
gleaning; while the 52d “Commonplace,” on Byron and Wordsworth, and the
12th and 11th “Trifles light as air,” on Fielding and on “modern”
critics, play the same part there.

[Sidenote: The Spirit of the Age.]

On the other hand, _The Spirit of the Age_ (with the exception of some
political and philosophical matter) is wholly literary; and may rank
with the three sets of _Lectures_ and the _Characters of Shakespeare_ as
the main storehouse of Hazlitt’s criticism. Here, too, there is much
repetition, and here, at the end of the Scott article, is the almost
insane outburst more than once referred to. But the bulk of the book is
at Hazlitt’s very best pitch of appreciative grasp. If he is anywhere
out of focus, it is in reference to Godwin’s novels—the setting of which
in any kind of comparison with Scott’s (though Hazlitt was critic enough
from the first to see that Godwin could by no possibility be the “Author
of _Waverley_”) is a remarkable instance of the disadvantage of the
contemporary, and, to some extent, the sympathiser. But the book
certainly goes far to bear out the magnificent eulogy of Hazlitt for
which Thackeray[515] took it as text, quite early in his career.

[Sidenote: Sketches and Essays.]

The _Sketches and Essays_ are again very rich, where they are rich; and
advertise the absence of riches most frankly where they are not. “On
Reading New Books”; not a little of “Merry England”; the whole of “On
Taste” and “Why the Heroes of Romances are insipid” speak for
themselves, and do not bewray their claim. “Taste,” especially,
contains[516] one of Hazlitt’s own titles to critical supremacy in his
fixing on Perdita’s primrose description as itself supreme, when “the
scale of fancy, passion, and observation of nature is raised” high
enough. [Sidenote: Winterslow.] And as for _Winterslow_, its first and
its last papers are “things enskied” in criticism, for the one is “My
First Acquaintance with Poets,” and the last “The Farewell to Essay
Writing.”

[Sidenote: _Hazlitt’s critical virtue,_]

These two last, the sentence on

             “That come before the swallow dares, and take
             The winds of March with beauty”;

and (say) the paper referred to a little above on “Poetical
Versatility,” will serve as texts for some more general remarks on
Hazlitt’s critical character. We have said at the beginning of this
notice everything that need be said by way of deduction or allowance; we
have only hinted at the clear critical “balance to credit” which
remains; and these essays and passages will help to bring this out.

To take the “Poetic Versatility” first, it is an interesting paper, and
with the aid of those “characters” of poets, &c., which have been
indicated in the survey just completed, gives the best possible idea of
one (and perhaps the most popular) of Hazlitt’s forms of critical
achievement and influence. In it he eddies round his subject—completing
his picture of it by strokes apparently promiscuous in selection, but
always tending to body forth the image that presents itself to him, and
that he wishes to present to his readers. “Poetry dwells in a perpetual
Utopia of its own.” It “does not create difficulties where they do not
exist, but contrives to get rid of them whether they exist or not.” “Its
strength is in its wings; its element the air.” We “may leave it to time
to take out the stains, seeing it is a thing immortal as itself.” Poets
“either find things delightful or make them so,” &c. &c., some of the
etceteras drawing away from the everlasting, and condescending rather
lamentably to the particular.

[Sidenote: _in set pieces,_]

Now there is no need to tell the reader—even the reader of this book, I
hope—that this, of these utterances, is a reproduction of Longinus (whom
Hazlitt most probably had not read), or that of Coleridge, whom most
certainly he had both read and heard.[517] “The man who plants cabbages
imitates too”: and it is only the foolishest folk of rather foolish
times who endeavour to be original, though the wisest of all times
always succeed in being so. The point with Hazlitt is that in these
circlings round his subject—these puttings of every possible way in
which, with or without the help of others, it strikes him—he gives the
greatest possible help to others in being struck. One of the blows will
almost certainly hit the nail on the head and drive it home into any
tolerably susceptible mind: many may, and the others after the first
will help to fix it. Of method there may not be very much—there is
rather more here than in most cases; but whether there is method or not,
“everything,” in the old military phrase, “goes in”; the subject and the
reader are carried by assault, mass, variety, repetition of argument,
imagery, phrase. Hazlitt will not be refused; he takes towns at a
hand-gallop, like Condé at Lerida—and he does not often lose them
afterwards.

[Sidenote: _and universally._]

In this phase of his genius, however, there is perhaps, for some tastes
at any rate, a little too much of what has been called _bravura_—too
much of the merely epideictic. It is not so in the other. Appreciate the
appreciation of the _Winter’s Tale_ passage; still more take to heart
(they will go to it without much taking where there is one) the “First
Acquaintance with Poets,” or still better the marvellous critical
swan-song of the “Farewell,” and there can be no more doubt about
Hazlitt. _Quia multum amavit_ is at once his best description and his
greatest glory. In all the range of criticism which I have read I can
hardly think of any one except Longinus who displays the same faculty of
not unreasonable or unreasoned passion for literature; and Longinus,
alas! has, as an opportunity for showing this to us, scarcely more than
the bulk of one of Hazlitt’s longest Essays, of which, long and short,
Hazlitt himself has given us, I suppose, a hundred. Nor, as in some
others (many, if not most of whom, if I named them, I should name for
the sake of honour), is a genuine passion made the mere theme of
elaborate and deliberate literary variations. As we have seen, Hazlitt
will often leave it expressed in one sentence of ejaculatory and
convincing fervour; it seldom appears at greater length than that of a
passage, while a whole lecture or essay in the key of rapture is
exceedingly rare. Hazlitt is desultory, irrelevant, splenetic, moody,
self-contradictory; but he is never merely pleonastic,—there is no mere
verbiage, no mere virtuosity, in him.

And the consequence is that this enthusiastic appreciation of letters,
which I have, however heretically, taken throughout this book to be
really the highest function of criticism, _catches_: that the critical
yeast (to plagiarise from ourselves) never fails to work. The order of
history, as always, should probably be repeated, and the influence of
Coleridge should be felt, as Hazlitt himself felt it, first: it is well
to fortify also with Longinus himself, and with Aristotle, and with as
many others of the great ones as the student can manage to master. But
there is at least a danger, with some perhaps of not the worst minds, of
all this remaining cold as the bonfire before the torch is applied. The
_silex scintillans_ of Hazlitt’s rugged heart will seldom fail to give
the vivifying spark from its own inward and immortal fire.[518]

[Sidenote: _Blake._]

There have been times—perhaps they are not quite over—when the admission
of William Blake[519] into the category of critics would have been
regarded as an absurdity, or a bad jest. Nothing is more certain,
however, than that the poet-painter expresses, with a force and
directness rather improved by that lack of complete technical sanity
which some of his admirers most unwisely and needlessly deny, the
opinions of the “Extreme Right,” the high-fliers of the Army of
Romanticism. He may often be thinking of painting rather than of poetry;
but this is sometimes expressedly not the case, and many of his most
pointed sayings apply to the one art just as well as to the other—if
indeed it would not be still more correct to say that, except when they
concern mere technique, they always apply to both. His work, despite the
attention which it has received from hands, sometimes of the most
eminent, during the last forty years, has never yet been edited in a
fashion making its chaos cosmic or the threading of its labyrinths easy:
and it may be well to bring together some of the most noteworthy
critical expressions in it. That which has been referred to in a former
passage,[520] “Every man is a judge of pictures who has not been
connoisseured out of his senses,”[521] is in itself almost a miniature
manifesto of the new school of criticism. For “connoisseurship”—the
regular training in the orthodox system of judgment by rule and line and
pattern—is substituted the impression of the natural man, unconditioned
except by the retirement that it _shall_ be impression, and not
prejudice.

[Sidenote: _His critical position and dicta._]

So, again, that remarkable expression of the Prophet Isaiah[522] when,
as Blake casually mentions, he and Ezekiel “dined with me”—an occasion
on which surely any one of taste would like to have completed the
quartette. The poet-host tells us that he asked, “Does a firm persuasion
that a thing is so make it so?” and that the prophet-guest answered,
“All poets believe that it does”—a position from which La Harpism and
the reluctance to “surrender disbelief” are at once crushed, concluded,
and quelled.

In the remarkable engraved page on Homer and Virgil,[523] Blake
adventures himself (not with such rashness as may at first seem) against
Aristotle (or what he takes for Aristotle), by laying it down that Unity
and Morality belong to philosophy, not poetry, or at least are secondary
in the latter; that goodness and badness are not distinctions of
“character” (a saying in which there is some quibbling but much depth as
well); that the Classics, not Goths or Monks, “desolate Europe with
wars” (a great enough dictum at the junction of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries); and that “Grecian wit is mathematical form,”
which is only “eternal in the reasoning memory,” while Gothic is “living
form, that is to say, eternal existence”—perhaps the deepest saying of
the whole, though it wants large allowance and intelligent taking.

The “Notes on Reynolds” are naturally full of our stuff.

[Sidenote: _The “Notes on Reynolds”_]

“Enthusiastic admiration is the first principle of knowledge.” [Sir
Joshua had stated just the contrary.]

“What has reasoning to do with the art of painting [or, we may safely
add, of poetry]?”

“Knowledge of ideal beauty is not to be acquired; it is born in us.”

“One central form ... being granted, it does not follow that all other
forms are deformity. All forms are perfect in the poet’s mind, ... they
are from imagination.”

“To generalise is to be an idiot. To particularise is the great
distinction of merit.” [The “streak of the tulip” re-habilitated, and
with a vengeance!]

“Invention depends altogether upon execution.”

“Passion and expression are beauty itself.”

“Ages are all equal: but genius is always above its age.”

[Sidenote: _and Wordsworth._]

It is worth while to add to these the very remarkable annotations upon
Wordsworth’s Prefaces: “I don’t know who wrote these: they are very
mischievous, and direct contrary to Wordsworth’s own practice” [where if
Blake had added the words “when he is a poet,” he would simply have
given the conclusion of the whole matter], with the very shrewd addendum
that Wordsworth is not so much attacking poetic diction, or defending
his own, as “vindicating unpopular poets.”

[Sidenote: _Commanding position of these._]

Scanty as this critical budget may seem, its individual items are of
extraordinary weight, when we remember that some of them were written
before the _Lyrical Ballads_ themselves appeared, and all of them by a
man of hardly any reading in contemporary literature, and quite out of
the circle of Coleridgean influence. It is scarcely, if at all, too much
to say that they are almost enough to start, in a fit mind, the whole
system of Romantic criticism in its more abstract form, and sometimes
even in its particular and concrete applications. All the
eighteenth-century Dagons—the beliefs in official connoisseurship, in
the unapproachable supremacy of the ancients, in the barbarism and
foolishness of Gothic art and literature, in the superiority of the
general to the particular, in the necessity of extracting central forms
and holding to them, in the supremacy of reason, in the teachableness of
poetry, in the virtues of copying, in the superiority of design to
execution,—all are tumbled off their pedestals with the most irreverent
violence. That the critic’s applications in the sister art to Rubens, to
Titian, to Reynolds himself, are generally unjust, and not infrequently
the result of pure ignorance, does not matter; his own formulas would
often correct him quite as thoroughly as those of the classical school.
What is important is his discovery and enunciation of these formulas
themselves.

For by them, in place of these battered gods of the classical or
neo-classical Philistia, are set up Imagination for Reason, Enthusiasm
for Good Sense, the Result for the Rule; the execution for the mere
conception or even the mere selection of subject; impression for
calculation; the heart and the eyes and the pulses and the fancy for the
stop-watch and the boxwood measure and the table of specifications. It
is not necessary to argue the question whether Blake’s own poetical work
(we are not concerned with his pictorial) justifies or disconcerts the
theories under which it was composed; it may be very strongly suspected,
from utterances new as well as old, that approval of the theory and
approval of the practice, as well as disapproval in each case, are too
intimately bound up with each other to make appeal to either much of an
argument. But for our main purpose, which is purely historical, the
importance of Blake should, even in these few pages, have been put out
of doubt. In no contemporary—not in Coleridge himself—is the
counter-creed to that of the Neo-classics formulated with a sharper
precision, and withal a greater width of inclusion and sweep.

[Sidenote: _Sir Walter Scott commonly undervalued as a critic._]

There are more senses than one (or for the matter of that two) in the
famous proverb, “The better is the enemy of the good.” And in one of
them, though not the commonest, it is eminently true of the criticism of
Sir Walter Scott. No one, of course, would give to Scott any such
relative rank as a critic as that which is his due either as poet or as
novelist; but the extent to which his fame as poet and novelist has
obscured his reputation as critic is altogether disproportionate and
unfair. It is even doubtful whether some tolerably educated persons ever
think of him as a critic at all. For his so-called “Prose Works” (except
_Tales of a Grandfather_) are very little read, and as usual the
criticism is the least read part of them. Yet it is a very large part—
extending, what with the Lives of _Swift_ and _Dryden_, the shorter
“_Biographies_,” the _Chivalry, Romance, and Drama_, and the collection
or selection of _Periodical Criticism_, to ten pretty solid volumes,
while even this excludes a great amount of critical matter in the notes
and Introductions to the _Poems_, the Novels, the _Dryden_ and _Swift_
themselves, and other by-works of Sir Walter’s gigantic industry.

Mere bulk, however, it may be said, is nothing—indeed it is too often,
in work of which posterity is so shy as it is of criticism, a positive
misfortune and drawback. What makes the small account taken of Scott as
a critic surprising and regrettable is the goodness as well as the bulk
of his critical production. Perhaps it may be urged with some justice,
in defence of this popular neglect, that his want of attention to style
is particularly unfortunate here. He is notoriously a rather “incorrect”
writer; and he does not, as many so-called incorrect writers have known
how to do, supply the want of academic propriety by irregular
brilliances of any kind.

[Sidenote: _Injustice of this._]

Another charge sometimes brought against him—that he is too good-natured
and too indiscriminate in praise—will less hold water;[524] and indeed
is much too closely connected with the popular notion of the critic as a
sort of “nigger”-overseer, whose business is to walk about and
distribute lashes—a notion which cannot be too often reprobated. As a
private critic Scott _was_ sometimes too easy-going, but by no means
always or often in his professional utterances. And he had what are
certainly two of the greatest requirements of the critic, reading and
sanity. Sometimes some amiable prepossession (such as the narrower
patriotism in his relative estimate of Fielding and Smollett) leads him
a little astray; but this is very seldom—far seldomer than is the rule
with critics of anything like his range. Here, as elsewhere, he does not
much affect the larger and deeper and higher generalisations; but here,
as elsewhere, his power of reaching these has been considerably
underrated. And the distaste itself saves him—and his readers—from the
hasty and floundering failures of those who aim more ambitiously at
width, depth, and height. In the methodic grasp and orderly exposition
of large and complicated subjects (as in the _Romance_[525] and _Drama_
examples) he leaves nothing to desire. Sometimes, in his regular
reviews, he condescends too much to the practice of making the review a
mere abstract of the book; but I have known readers who complain
bitterly of any other mode of proceeding.

Moreover, in two most important divisions of the critic’s art Scott has
very few superiors. These are the appreciation of particular passages,
books, and authors, and the writing of those critical biographies which
Dryden first essayed in English, and of which Johnson is the
acknowledged master. The Prefaces to the Ballantyne Novels[526] are the
best among Scott’s good things in this kind on the small scale, as the
_Dryden_ and the _Swift_ are on the great: for evidences of the former
excellence the reader has only to open any one of the half-score volumes
referred to above. And those golden qualities of heart which accompanied
his genius are illustrated, as well as that genius itself, in his
frequent critical writing on other novelists. The criticism of creators
on their fellows is not always pleasant reading, except for those who
delight to study the weaknesses of the _verdammte Race_. Scott
criticises great and small among the folk of whom he is the king, from
the commonest romancer up to Jane Austen, with equal generosity,
acuteness, and technical mastery. Nor ought we, in this necessarily
inadequate sketch, to omit putting in his cap the feather so often to be
refused to critics—the feather of catholicity. Macaulay could not praise
the delightful lady, whom both he and Scott did their utmost to
celebrate, without throwing out a fling at _Sintram_, as if there were
no room for good things of different kinds in the great region of
Romance. In Scott’s works you may find,[527] literally side by side, and
characterised by equal critical sense, the eulogy of _Persuasion_ and
the eulogy of _Frankenstein_.[528]

[Sidenote: _Campbell: his_ Lectures on Poetry.]

Campbell’s critical work is chiefly concentrated in two places, one of
them accessible with some difficulty, the other only too accessible
after a fashion. The first is the _Lectures on Poetry_, which, after
delivering them at the Royal Institution during the great vogue of such
things in 1820, he refashioned later for the _New Monthly Magazine_ when
he was its editor, so that they are only to be had by one of the least
agreeable of all processes, the rummaging _for a purpose_ in an old
periodical.

[Sidenote: _His_ Specimens.]

The accessibility of the other place—the critical matter contributed to
the well-known _Specimens of the British Poets_, and to some extent the
actual selections themselves—is greater because they are in nearly all
the second-hand book-shops, where from sixpence to a shilling a volume
will buy—well bound often and in perfectly good condition—matter which,
at any proper ratio of exchange, is worth a dozen times the money. This
worth consists of course mainly in the matter selected: but the taste
which selected it must figure for no small increment, and the purely
critical framework is, to say the least, remarkably worthy of both.
Campbell, a very puzzling person in his poetry, is by no means a very
easily comprehensible or appraisable one in his critical attitude. In
the general arrangement of this he is distinctly of the older fashion,
as the fashions of his time went. Like his style, though this is a very
fair specimen of the “last Georgian,” still in a manner the standard and
staple of the plainer English prose, his opinions are a thought
periwigged and buckrammed. He demurs to the “Romantic Unity” of Hurd
earlier and Schlegel later; and when in his swashing blow (and a good
swashing blow it is of its kind) on the side of Pope in the weary
quarrel, he tries to put treatment of artificial on a poetical level
with treatment of natural objects, we must demur pretty steadily
ourselves. But, on the other hand, he distinctly champions (and was, I
believe, the first actually so to formulate) the principle that “in
poetry there are many mansions,” and, what is more, he lives up to it.
He really and almost adequately appreciates Chaucer: it is only his
prejudice about Unity and the Fable that prevents him from being a
thorough-going Spenserian; and when we come to the seventeenth century
he is quite surprising. Again, it is true, his _general_ creed makes him
declare that the metaphysicians “thought like madmen.” But he is juster
to some of them than Hazlitt is; he has the great credit of having
(after a note of Southey’s, it is true) re-introduced readers to the
mazy but magical charms of _Pharonnida_; and he admits Godolphin and
Stanley, Flatman and Ayres. If the history of the earlier part of his
Introductory Essay is shaky, it could not have been otherwise in his
time; and it shows that the indolence with which he is so often charged
did not prevent him from making a very good use of what Warton and
Percy, Tyrwhitt and Ritson and Ellis, had provided.

This indolence, however, is perhaps more evident in the distribution of
the criticism, which, if not careless, is exceedingly capricious.
Campbell seems at first to have intended to concentrate this criticism
proper in the Introduction (to which nearly the whole of the first
volume is allotted), and to make the separate prefaces to the selections
mainly biographical. But he does not at all keep to this rule; the main
_Introduction_ itself is, if anything, rather too copious at the
beginning, while it is compressed and hurried at the end: not a few of
the minor pieces and less prominent poets have no criticism at all;
while, in the case of those that have it, it is often extremely
difficult to discover the principle of its allotment. Yet, on the whole,
Campbell ought never to be neglected by the serious student; for even if
his criticism were solely directed from an obsolete standpoint, it would
be well to go back to it now and then as a half-way house between those
about Johnson and those about Coleridge, while as a matter of fact it
has really a very fair dose of universal quality.[529]

[Sidenote: _Shelley: his_ Defence of Poetry.]

There are several critical passages in Shelley’s _Letters_, but, as
formally preserved, his criticism is limited to the _Defence of Poetry_,
which, despite its small bulk, is of extreme interest.[530] It is almost
the only return of its times to that extremely abstract consideration of
the matter which we found prevalent in the Renaissance, and which in
Shelley’s case, as in the cases of Fracastoro or of Sidney, is
undoubtedly inspired by Plato. It seems to have been immediately
prompted by some heresies of Peacock’s: but, as was always its author’s
habit, in prose as well as in verse, he drifts “away, afar” from what
apparently was his starting-point, over a measureless ocean of abstract
thinking. He endeavours indeed, at first, to echo the old saws about men
“imitating natural objects in the youth of the world” and the like, but
he does not in any way keep up the arrangement, and we are almost from
the outset in contact with his own ardent imagination—of which quality
he at once defines poetry as the expression. Again, the poetic faculty
is “the faculty of approximation to the beautiful.” Once more we have
the proud claim for poetry that poets are not merely the authors of
arts, but the inventors of laws, the teachers of religion. They
“participate in the eternal, the infinite, and the one.” They are not
necessarily confined to verse, but they will be wise to use it. A poem
is the very image of life, expressed in its eternal truth. “Poetry is
something divine,” the “centre and circumference of knowledge,” the
“perfect and consummate surface and bloom of all things,” the “record of
the best and happiest moments of the happiest and best minds.” All which
(or all except the crotchet about verse) I for one do most powerfully
and potently believe: though if any one says that, as generally with
Shelley, one is left stranded, or rather floating, in the vague, denial
is not easy. One can only wish oneself, as Poins wished his sister, “no
worse fortune.”[531]

[Sidenote: _Landor._]

In the course of this History we have seen not infrequent examples of
Criticism divorced from Taste—a severance to which the peculiarities of
classical and neo-classical censorship lent but too much encouragement.
It must be obvious that the general tendency of the criticism which we
are calling Modern inclines towards the divorce of Taste from Criticism—
to the admission of the monstrous regiment of mere arbitrary enjoyment
and liking, not to say mere caprice. But it is curious that our first
very distinguished example of this should be found in a person who, both
by practice and in theory, had very distinct “classical” tendencies—who,
in fact, with the possible exception of Mr Arnold, was the most
classical of at least the English writers of the nineteenth century.

[Sidenote: _His lack of judicial quality._]

Landor’s[532] critical shortcomings, however, are the obvious and
practically inevitable result of certain well-known peculiarities of
temperament, moral rather than intellectual, and principles of life
rather than of literature. With him, as with King Lear (whom in more
ways and points than one he resembled, though, luckily, with the tragedy
infinitely softened and almost smoothed away), the dominant is
_impotentia_—the increasing and at last absolute incapacity of the
intellect and will to govern the emotions and impulses. Now, as
criticism is itself an endless process of correcting impressions—or at
least of checking and auditing them till we are sure that they are
genuine, co-ordinated, and (with the real if not the apparent
consistency) consistent—a man who suffers from this _impotentia_ simply
cannot be a real critic, though he may occasionally make observations
critically sound.

[Sidenote: _In regular Criticism._]

The rule and the exceptions hold good with Landor unfailingly. He was an
excellent scholar; his acquaintance with modern literatures, though much
smaller and extremely arbitrary, was not positively small, and his
taste, in some directions at least, was delicate and exquisite. But of
judicial quality or qualities he had not one single trace, and, even
putting them out of the question, his intelligence was streaked and
flawed by strange veins of positive silliness. We need not dwell too
much on his orthographical and other whims, which have been shared by
some great ones—the judgments are the things. In the very first
paragraph of his very first regular criticism we find the statement that
the Poems of Bion and Moschus are not only “very different” from those
of Theocritus but “very inferior.” Inferior in what? in bulk certainly:
but in what else are the _Adonis_ and the _Bion_ itself inferior to
anything Theocritean? A critic should have been warned by his own
“different” not to rush on the “inferior,” which is so often
fallaciously consequent. I shall not be accused of excessive
Virgil-worship, but what criticism is there in the objection to _me
ceperat annus_ as “scarcely Latin” (really! really! Mr Landor, you were
not quite a Pollio!), and in the flat emendation of _mihi coeperat_; or
in the contemptuous treatment of that exquisite piece containing

                        ὁ θὴρ δ' ἔβαινε δειλῶς,
                        φοβεῖτο γὰρ Κυθήρην,

a phrase which, for simplicity, pictorial effect, and suggestion, is
almost worthy of Sappho? Such a sentence as that of Politian’s poems,
“one only has any merit,” is simply disabling: mere schoolboy prejudice
has evidently blinded the speaker. Yet it occurs in his best critique,
that on Catullus.

[Sidenote: _The Conversations._]

These set criticisms, however, are few, and Landor was evidently not at
ease in them. The literary “Conversations,” it may be said, are the true
test. And it is at least certain that these conversations supply not a
few of those more excellent critical observations which have been
acknowledged and saluted. Especially must we acknowledge and salute
one[533] which, though of considerable length, must be made an exception
to the rule of “not quoting.” Nowhere, in ancient or modern place, is
the education of the critic outlined with greater firmness and accuracy;
and those who, by this or that good fortune, have been put through some
such a process, may congratulate themselves on having learnt no vulgar
art in no vulgar way.

[Sidenote: _Loculus aureolus._]

  l would seriously recommend to the employer of our critics, young and
  old, that he oblige them to pursue a course of study such as this;
  that, under the superintendence of some respectable student from the
  University, they first read and examine the contents of the book—a
  thing greatly more useful in criticism than is generally thought;
  secondly, that they carefully write them down, number them, and range
  them under their several heads; thirdly, that they mark every
  beautiful, every faulty, every ambiguous, every uncommon expression.
  Which being completed, that they inquire what author, ancient or
  modern, has treated the same subject; that they compare them, first in
  smaller, afterwards in larger portions, noting every defect in
  precision and its causes, every excellence and its nature; that they
  graduate these, fixing _plus_ and _minus_, and designating them more
  accurately and discriminately by means of colours stronger or paler.
  For instance purple might express grandeur and majesty of thought;
  scarlet, vigour of expression; pink, liveliness; green, elegant and
  equable composition; these, however, and others as might best attract
  their notice and serve their memory. The same process may be used
  where authors have not written on the same subject, when those who
  have are wanting or have touched on it but incidentally. Thus Addison
  and Fontenelle, not very like, may be compared in the graces of style,
  in the number and degree of just thoughts and lively fancies; thus the
  dialogues of Cicero with those of Plato, his ethics with those of
  Aristotle, his orations with those of Demosthenes. It matters not if
  one be found superior to the other in this thing and inferior in that:
  the qualities of two authors are explored and understood and their
  distances laid down, as geographers speak, from accurate survey. The
  _plus_ and _minus_ of good and bad and ordinary will have something of
  a scale to rest upon: and after a time the degrees of the higher parts
  in intellectual dynamics may be more nearly attained, though never
  quite exactly.

[Sidenote: _But again disappointing._]

Yet in close context with this very passage comes an idle “splurt”
(evidently half-due to _odium anti-theologicum_) at Coleridge—a thing
exactly of the kind which such discipline as has been just recommended
should check. And everywhere, especially in the long Miltonic examen
between “Southey and Landor,” the effects of Landor’s character appear
side by side with a sort of peddling and niggling censorship which one
might have thought not natural to that character at all, and which
perhaps is a _damnosa hereditas_ from the worse kind of classical
scholarship. Even on Boileau[534] he manages to be unfair; and at his
objection to one of Milton’s most exquisite and characteristic lines—

                 “Lancelot and Pelleas and Pellinore”—

one can but cover the face. Caprice, arbitrary legislation, sometimes
positive blindness and deafness,—these are Landor’s critical marks when
he quits pure theory, and sometimes when he does not quit it.

[Sidenote: _The revival of the Pope quarrels._]

With him we leave the “majorities”—those who, whether greater or lesser
critics, were great either as such or in other paths of letters. Some
smaller, but in some cases not so small, persons remain, with one or two
examples—one specially famous—of what we have called “the Adversaries.”
And first we must touch (if only in order to deal with yet another of
the majorities themselves, who has seemed to some to be a critic) on the
“Pope a Poet” quarrel.

[Sidenote: _Bowles._]

We have seen[535] that this quarrel, originally raised by Joseph Warton,
was even by him latterly waged as by one _cauponans bellum_; but a
lazily and gingerly waged war is generally a long one, and this instance
did not discredit the rule. Johnson’s intervention[536] in it, in his
_Life_ of Pope, was sensible and moderate—indeed, with certain necessary
allowances, it is fairly decisive. But Pope, among his other
peculiarities, has had the fate of making foes of his editors, and this
was the case with the Reverend William Lisle Bowles, who revived the
fainting battle,[537] not to any one’s advantage or particular credit,
and to his own dire tribulation. Bowles is one of those not
uninteresting people, in all divisions of history, who, absolutely
rather null, have not inconsiderable relative importance. The influence
of his early sonnets on Coleridge, and through Coleridge on the whole
Romantic revival in England, is well known, and not really surprising.
In the remainder of his long and on the whole blameless life, he
committed a great deal of verse which, though not exactly bad, is
utterly undistinguished and unimportant. His theory of poetry, however,
though somewhat one-sided, was better than his practice: and it was
rather as a result of that dangerous thing Reaction, and from a lack of
alertness and catholicity, than from positive heresy, that he fell foul
of Pope. In his edition he laid down, and in the controversy following
he defended,[538] certain “invariable principles of Poetry,” of which
the first and foremost was that images, thoughts, &c., derived from
Nature and Passion, are always more sublime and pathetic than those
drawn from Art and Manners. And it was chiefly on this ground that he,
of course following his leader Warton, but using newer material and
tactics, disabled, partially or wholly, the claims of Pope. Hereupon
arose a hubbub. Campbell in the _Specimens_[539] took a hand; Byron
wrote a _Letter to John Murray_[540] in defence of his favourite, and in
ridicule of Bowles; auxiliaries and adversaries ran up on both sides.
Whether Bowles was most happy or unhappy in the turmoil I am unable to
say, but he was certainly put in a great state of agitation, and
showered Pamphlets with elaborate titles, which one may duly find, with
their occasions and rejoinders, in the library of the British Museum. At
last dust settled on the conflict, which, however, is itself not quite
settled to the present day, and in fact never can be, because it depends
on one of the root differences of poetical taste. However, it probably
helped the wiser sort to take the _via media_, even such a Romantic as
Hazlitt vindicating Pope’s possession of “the poetical point of view,”
and did, for the same sort, a service to the general history of
criticism by emphasising the above-mentioned difference. Bowles himself,
if he had been less fussy, less verbose, less given to “duply and
quadruply” on small controversial points, and more a man of the world
and of humour, might not have made by any means a bad critic. As it was,
he was right in the main.

[Sidenote: _Byron._]

We must, however, I suppose, say something, if only in this connection,
of Byron as a critic. I do not think it necessary to say very much; and
I shall not, as I could most easily do, concatenate here the innumerable
contradictions of critical opinion in his _Letters_, which show that
they were mere flashes of the moment, connected not merely by no
critical theory but by no critical taste of any consistency, flings,
“half-bricks” directed at dog or devil or divinity, according to the
mood in which the “noble poet” chose to find himself. [Sidenote: _The_
Letter to Murray, _&c._] Let us confine ourselves to that unquestionably
remarkable _Letter to John Murray_ on Bowles and Pope, which is
admittedly his critical diploma-piece. There are of course very good
things in it. Byron was a genius; and your genius will say genial things
now and then, whatsoever subject he happens to be treating. But he
cannot in the very least maintain himself at the critical point: he is
like the ball in the fountain, mounting now and then gloriously on the
summit of the column and catching the rays that it attracts and
reflects, much more often lying wallowing in the basin. Never was such
critical floundering. He blasphemes at one moment the “invariable
principles of poetry,” about which the amiable but somewhat ineffectual
Bowles prated; he affirms them at the next, by finding in his way, and
blindly picking up, the secret of secrets, that the poet who _executes_
best is the highest, whatsoever his department; and he makes his
affirmation valueless, by saying, almost before we have turned the page,
that Lucretius is ruined by his ethics, and Pope saved by them. Even
setting ethic against ethic, the proposition is at least disputable: but
what on earth has Ethic to do with Execution, except that they both
occur in the dictionary under E? There are other excellent things in the
letter, and yet others the reverse of excellent; but I have not the
least intention here of setting up a balance-sheet after the manner of
Robinson Crusoe, of ranging Byron’s undoubtedly true, though not novel,
vindication of the human element as invariably necessary to poetry,
against his opinion of Shelley, and of Keats, and of the English poetry
of his greatest contemporaries generally, as “all Claudian,” and against
the implied estimate of Claudian himself. This would be a confusion like
his own, a parallel _ignoratio elenchi_, a _fallacia a fallacioribus_.
Suffice it to say, that to take him seriously as a critic is
impossible.[541]

[Sidenote: _Others: Isaac Disraeli._]

Of the work which—sometimes of the inner citizenship of the critical
Rome and at the worst of its “utmost last provincial band”—was done by a
great number of individuals and in no small number of periodicals,
dictionaries, and what not, we cannot speak here as fully as would be
pleasant,—the historian must become a “reasoned cataloguer” merely, and
that by selection. Two contemporary and characteristic figures are those
of Isaac Disraeli and of Sir Egerton Brydges. Both had the defects of
the antiquarian quality. Rogers, though unamiable, was probably not
unjust when, in acknowledging the likelihood of Isaac Disraeli’s
collections enduring, he described him as “a man with half an
intellect.” In formation and expression of opinion, Lord Beaconsfield’s
father too often wandered from the silly to the self-evident and back
again, like Addison between his two bottles at the ends of the Holland
House gallery: and his numerous _collectanea_ would certainly be more
useful if they were more accurate. But the _Curiosities_, the
_Amenities_, the _Quarrels_, and all the rest show an ardent love for
literature itself, and a singularly wide knowledge of it: they are well
calculated to inoculate readers, especially young readers, with both.

[Sidenote: _Sir Egerton Brydges._]

Brydges’s work, less popular, is of a higher quality. His extensive
editing labours were beyond price at his date; in books like the
_Censura Literaria_ much knowledge is still readily accessible, which
can only be picked up elsewhere by enormous excursions of reading at
large; and his original critical power was much higher than is generally
allowed. Such enthusiastic admiration of Shelley as is displayed in the
notes to his Geneva reprint of the English part of Phillips' _Theatrum
Poetarum_ in 1824,[542] is not often shown by a man of sixty-two for a
style of poetry entirely different from that to which he has been
accustomed. And it shows, not merely how true a training the study of
older literature is for the appreciation of newer, but that there must
have been something to train.

[Sidenote: The Retrospective Review.]

Moreover, this first period of enthusiastic exploration did not merely
produce the lectures of Coleridge and Hazlitt, and the unsurpassed
essays of Lamb, the hardly surpassed ones of Leigh Hunt. It produced
also, by the combined efforts of a band of somewhat less distinguished
persons, a periodical publication of very considerable bulk and of
almost unique value and interest. It is not for nothing that while old
magazines and reviews are usually sold for less than the cost of their
binding, and not much more than their value as waste-paper, _The
Retrospective Review_[543] still has respectable, though of course not
fantastic, prices affixed to it in the catalogues. It was started in
1820, under the editorship of Henry Southern,[544] a diplomatist from
the Cantabrigian Trinity, and of the antiquary afterwards so well known
as Sir Harris Nicolas. Opening with a first volume of extraordinary
excellence, it kept up for seven years and fourteen volumes, on a
uniform principle. The second series, however, which was started after I
know not what breach of continuity,[545] was less fortunate, and extends
to two volumes only, though these contain much more matter apiece than
the earlier ones. It is not uncommon to find these two volumes, and even
some of the first series, wanting in library sets, which librarians
should do their best to complete; for though, toward the end, the purely
antiquarian matter encroached a very little upon the literary, there is
not a volume from first to last which does not contain literary matter
of the highest interest and value.[546]

The proud-looked and high-stomached persons who pronounce the best in
this kind but shadows, and regard old criticism as being—far more than
history in its despised days—“an old almanack,” will of course look
prouder and exalt their stomachs higher at the use of such terms. So be
it. Some day people will perhaps begin to understand generally what
criticism is, and what is its importance. Then more—as some do already—
will appreciate the interest and the value of this work of Nicolas,
Palgrave, Talfourd, Hartley Coleridge, and other good men. It would be
perfectly easy to make fun of it. The style may be to modern tastes a
little stilted when it is ambitious, and a little jejune when it is not—
in both cases after the way of the last Georgian standard prose.
Although there is much and real learning, our philologers might
doubtless exalt _their_ stomachs over the neglect of their favourite
study: and the fetichists of biography might discover that many a Joan
is called Jane, and many a March made into February. These drawbacks and
defects are more than compensated by the general character of the
treatment. While not despising bibliography, the writers as a rule do
not put it first, like Sir Egerton Brydges: nor do they indulge in the
egotistical _pot-pourri_ of “Chandos of Sudeley.” They have the enormous
advantage, in most cases, of coming quite fresh to their work,—of being
able to give a real “squeeze” direct from the original brass, with the
aid of their own appreciation, unmarred and unmingled by reminiscences
of this essay and that treatise, by the necessity of combating this or
that authority on their subject. They look at that subject itself, and
even when they show traces of a little prejudice—as in the opposite
cases of the man who is rather hard on Dryden and the man who is, for
the nineteenth century, astonishingly “soft” on Glover—the impression is
obviously genuine and free from forgery.

What is more, these Reviewers give themselves, as a rule, plenty of
room, and supply abundant extracts—things of the first importance in the
case of books, then as a rule to be found only in the old editions, and
in many cases by no means common now. The scope is wide. The first
volume gives, _inter alia_, articles on Chamberlayne (one for
_Pharonnida_ and one for _Love’s Victory_), on Crashaw and Dryden, on
Rymer and Dennis and Heinsius, on Ben Jonson and Cyrano de Bergerac, on
the _Urn Burial_, and on such mere curiosities as _The Voyage of the
Wandering Knight_. The papers throughout on Drama, from the Mysteries
onward, and including separate articles on the great Elizabethan minors,
were, till Pearson’s reprints thirty years ago, the most accessible
source of information on their subjects, and are still specially
notable; as are also the constituents of another interesting series on
Spanish Literature. The _Arcadia_ balances Butler’s _Remains_ in vol.
ii. Vaughan and Defoe, _Imitations of Hudibras_, and that luckless
dramatist and mad but true poet, Lee,[547] have their places in the
Third, where also some one (though he came a little too early to know
the _Chansons de gestes_, and so did not put “things of Charlemagne” in
their right order) has an interesting article on the Italian compilation
_La Spagna_. I should like to continue this sampling throughout the
sixteen volumes, but space commands only a note on the rest in
detail.[548]

Nor are they afraid of more general discussion. In the above-mentioned
article on John Dennis there is a long passage which I do not remember
to have seen anywhere extracted, dealing in a singularly temperate and
reasonable fashion with the “off-with-his-head” style of criticism put
in fashion by the _Edinburgh_; and others will be easily found. But they
do not as a rule lay themselves out much for “preceptive” criticism. It
is the _other_ new style of intelligent and well-willing interpretation
to which they incline, and they carry it out with extraordinary ability
and success. To supply those who may not have time, opportunity, or
perhaps even inclination to read more or less out-of-the way originals
with some intelligible and enjoyable knowledge of them at second-hand;
to prepare, initiate, and guide those who are able and willing to
undertake such reading; to supply those who have actually gone through
it with estimates and judgments for comparison and appreciation—these
may be said to be their three objects. Some people may, of course, think
them trivial objects or unimportant; to me, I confess, they seem to be
objects extremely well worth attaining, and here very well attained. The
papers in the _Retrospective Review_, be it remembered, anticipated
Sainte-Beuve himself (much more such later English and American
practitioners as Mr Arnold, who was not born, and Mr Lowell, who was but
a yearling when it first appeared) in the production of the full
literary _causerie_, the applied and illustrative complement, in regard
to individual books, authors, or small subjects, of the literary history
proper. When people at last begin to appreciate what literary history
means, there will probably be, in every country, a collection of the
best essays of this kind arranged from their authors’ works conveniently
for the use of the student. And when such a collection is made in
England, no small part in it will be played by articles taken from the
_Retrospective Review_.

[Sidenote: _The_ Baviad _and_ Anti-Jacobin,]

For the last subdivision of this chapter we must go a little backwards.
The phenomena of English criticism in the last decade of the eighteenth
century are curious: and they might be used to support such very
different theories of the relations of Criticism and Creation, that
their most judicious use, perhaps, is to point the moral of the
riskiness of _any_ such theories. During this decade one great
generation was dying off and another even greater was but coming on.
Except Boswell’s _Life of Johnson_, and Burke’s last and best work
(which were both entirely of the past, and in the former case, at least,
presented a purely personal product), and the _Lyrical Ballads_ (which
were wholly of the future), with the shadowy work of Blake (hardly of
any time or even any place), nothing of extraordinary goodness appeared.
But a great deal appeared of a most ordinary and typical badness, and
this seems to have excited a peculiar kind of irregular or Cossack
criticism to carry on a guerilla war against the hosts of dreary or
fantastic dulness. Criticism had at this time little of a standing army:
the old _Critical_ and _Monthly_ Reviews were sinking into dotage
(though such a man as Southey wrote in the former), and the new class of
comparatively independent censorship, which put money in its purse and
carried its head high, was to wait for the _Edinburgh_ and the next
century. But Hayley and Sir James Bland Burges and the Della Cruscans;
but Darwin even, and even Godwin; nay, the very early antics of such men
as Coleridge and Southey themselves, with some things in them not so
antic perhaps, but seeming to their contemporaries of an antic
disposition—were more than critical flesh and blood could stand.
[Sidenote: _with Wolcot and Mathias._] The spirit which had animated
Rivarol[549] on the other side of the Channel came to animate Wolcot
(who had indeed showed it for some time[550]) and his enemy Gifford, and
the greater wits of the _Anti-Jacobin_, and even the pedantic and
prosaic Mathias.

Now the result of dwelling upon the works of that Pindar who was born
not in Bœotia but in Devonshire, and on the ever-beloved and delightful
_Poetry of the Anti-Jacobin_, if not also on its prose, would no doubt
be far more agreeable to the reader than much of what he actually finds
here: and to dwell on them would fall in with some of the writer’s
oldest and most cherished tastes. Nay, even the _Baviad_ and _Mæviad_,
out of proportion and keeping as is much of their satire, and the
_Pursuits of Literature_ itself,—despite its tedious ostentation of
learning, its endless irrelevance of political and other
note-divagation, and its disgusting donnishness without the dignity of
the better don,—give, especially in the three first cases, much marrowy
matter in the texts, and an abundance of the most exquisite
unintentional fooling in the passages cited by the copious notes.
Unfortunately so to dwell would be itself out of keeping and proportion
here. The things[551] are among the lightest and best examples of the
critical _soufflé_, well cheesed and peppered. Or (if the severer muses
and their worshippers disdain a metaphor from Cookery, that Cinderella
of the Fine Arts) let us say that they exemplify most agreeably the
substitution of a sort of critical _banderilla_, sometimes fatal enough
in its way, for the Thor’s hammer of Dryden and the stiletto of Pope.
But they are only symptoms—we have seen things of their kind before,
from Aristophanes downwards—and we must merely signal and register them
as we pass in this adventure, keeping and recommending them nevertheless
for quiet and frequent reading _delectationis causa_. The infallibility
and vitality of the _Anti-Jacobin_, in particular, for this purpose, is
something really prodigious. The _Rovers_ and the _New Morality_ and the
_Loves of the Triangles_ seem to lose none of their virtue during a
whole lifetime of the reader, and after a century of their own
existence.

[Sidenote: _The influence of the new_ Reviews, &c.]

There is, however, one point on which we not only may but must draw
special attention to them. There can be little doubt that these light
velitations of theirs prepared the way and sharpened the taste for a
very considerable refashioning and new-modelling of the regular
critical-Periodical army which followed so soon. In this new-modelling
some of them—Gifford, Canning, Ellis—were most important officers, and
there can be no doubt at all that many others transferred, consciously
or unconsciously, this lighter way of criticising from verse to prose,
or kept it up in verse itself such as _Rejected Addresses_, which in
turn handed on the pattern to the _Bon Gaultier Ballads_ in the middle,
and to much else at the end, of the nineteenth century. Part of the
style was of course itself but a resharpening of the weapons of the
Scriblerus Club; but these weapons were refurbished brightly, and not a
little repointed. The newer critic was at least supposed to remember
that he was not to be dull. Unfortunately the personal impertinence
which, though not pretty even in the verse-satirist, is by a sort of
prescription excusable or at least excused in him, transferred itself to
the prose: and the political intolerance became even greater.[552]

[Sidenote: _Jeffrey._]

It is not the least curious freak of the whirligig of time, as shown
working in this history, that not a century ago one of the chief places
here would have seemed inevitably due to Francis Jeffrey, while at the
present moment perhaps a large majority of readers would be disposed to
grudge him more than a paragraph, and be somewhat inclined to skip that.

[Sidenote: _His loss of place and its cause._]

We cannot “stint his sizings” to that extent. Yet it is also impossible
to give him much space, more particularly because his interest has
shrunk to, and is very unlikely ever greatly to swell from, that of a
kind of representative position. Jeffrey is no mere English La Harpe, as
some think: he does not exemplify the Neo-classical “Thorough,” the
rigour of the Rule, after the fashion which makes that remarkable person
so interesting. On the contrary, he is only the last and most noteworthy
instance of that mainly Neo-classic inconsistency which we pointed out
and on which we dwelt in the last volume. Except that he looks more
backward than forward, Jeffrey often reminds us rather of Marmontel. He
has inherited to the fullest extent the by this time ingrained English
belief that canons of criticism which exclude or depreciate Shakespeare
and Milton “will never do,” as he might have said himself: but he has
not merely inherited, he has expanded and supplemented it. He has not
the least objection to the new school of students and praisers of those
other Elizabethan writers, compared with whom Shakespeare would have
seemed to La Harpe almost a regular dramatist, and quite a sane and
orderly person. He has a strong admiration for Ford. He will follow a
safe fellow-Whig like Campbell in admiring such an extremely
anti-“classical” thing as Chamberlayne’s _Pharonnida_. He uses about
Dryden and Pope language not very different from Mr Arnold’s, and he is
quite enthusiastic (though of course with some funny metrical qualms)
about Cowper.

[Sidenote: _His inconsistency._]

But here (except in reference to a man like Keats, who had been
ill-treated by the Tories) he draws the line. There may have been
something political in the attitude which the _Edinburgh_ assumed
towards the great new school of poetry which arose between 1798 and
1820. But politics cannot have had everything to do with the matter, and
it cannot be an accident that Crabbe is about the only contemporary poet
of mark, except Byron, Campbell, and Rogers, whom Jeffrey cordially
praises. Above all, the reasons of his depreciation of poets so
different as Scott and Wordsworth, and the things of theirs that he
specially blames, are fatal. There is plenty to be said against Scott as
a poet, and plenty to be said against Wordsworth. _The Lay of the Last
Minstrel_ is far from faultlessly perfect: but the beauty of its
subject, its adaptation of antique matter and manner, and its new
versification, are almost beyond praise from the poetical point of view.
It is exactly these three things that Jeffrey most blames. There are
scores and hundreds of things in Wordsworth which are helplessly exposed
to the critical arrows: but a man who pronounces the _Daffodils_ “stuff”
puts himself down once for all, irrevocably, without hope of pardon or
of atonement, a person insensible to poetry as such, though there may be
kinds and forms of poetry which, from this or that cause, he is able to
appreciate.[553]

[Sidenote: _His criticism on Madame de Staël._]

Once more, as in Leigh Hunt’s case (though on the still smaller scale
desirable), we can take a “brick of the house” with advantage and
without absurdity. Indeed I hardly know anywhere a single Essay which
exhibits a considerable critic so representatively as is done for
Jeffrey by his article on Madame de Staël’s _De La Littérature_, which
appeared in the _Edinburgh_ for November 1812 and stands after the
Tractate on Beauty in the forefront of his Collected Works.[554] He was
in the full maturity of his critical powers; as a woman (for Jeffrey was
quite a chivalrous person), and as a kind of foreign and female Whig,
his author was sure of favourable treatment; the “philosophic”
atmosphere of the book appealed to his education, nationality, and
personal sympathies; and he had practically most of the knowledge
required.[555]

And the article is a very good article,—polite in its mild exposure of
Madame de Staël’s hasty generalisations, extremely clever and capable in
its own survey of literature—Jeffrey was particularly good at these
surveys and naturally inclined to them—sensible, competent, in the
highest degree readable. It would not be easy, unless we took something
of Southey’s on the other side, better to illustrate the immense advance
made by periodical criticism since the _Edinburgh_ itself had shown the
way.

Yet there are curious drawbacks and limitations which explain why
Jeffrey has not kept, and why he is perhaps not very likely to recover,
his pride of place. Part of his idiosyncrasy was a very odd kind of
pessimism, which one would rather have expected from a High Tory than
from a “blue and yellow,” however symbolical these colours may be of
fear. To Jeffrey—in the second decade of the new flourishing of English
poetry, which had at least eighty good years to run; in the very year of
the new birth of the novel; with Goethe still alive and Heine a boy in
Germany; with the best men of the great French mid-nineteenth century
already born—it seems that “the age of original genius is over.” Now,
when a man has once made up his mind to this, he is not likely to be
very tolerant of attempts on the age’s part to convince him that he is
wrong. But even his judgments of the past exhibit a curious want of
catholicity. The French vein, which is so strong in him, as well as the
general eighteenth-century spirit, which is so much stronger, appears in
a distinct tendency to set Latin above Greek. He commends the Greeks
indeed for their wonderful “rationality and moderation in imaginative
work,” suggesting, with a mixture of simplicity and shrewdness, that the
reason of this is the absence of any models. Having no originals, they
did not try to be better than these. His criticism of the two
literatures is taken from a very odd angle—or rather from a maze and web
of odd angles. “The fate of the Tarquins,” he says, “could never have
been regarded at Rome as a worthy occasion either of pity or horror.”
And he does not in the least seem to see—probably he would have
indignantly denied—that in saying this he is denying the Romans any
_literary_ sense at all. In Aristophanes he has nothing to remark but
his “extreme coarseness and vulgarity”; and “the immense difference
between Thucydides and Tacitus” is adjusted to the advantage of the
Roman. He actually seems to prefer Augustan to Greek poetry, and makes
the astonishing remark that “there is nothing at all in the whole range
of Greek literature like ... the fourth book of Virgil,” having
apparently never so much as heard of Apollonius Rhodius.[556]

That of mediæval literature he says practically nothing is not
surprising, but it must be taken into account: and his defence of
English Literature against his author, though perfectly good against
_her_, is necessarily rather limited by its actual purpose, and suggests
somehow that other limitations would have appeared if it had been freed
from this.

[Sidenote: _Its lesson._]

In short, though we cannot support the conclusion further, the very word
“limitation” suggests the name of Jeffrey, in the sphere of criticism.
He seems to be constantly “pulled up” by some mysterious check-rein,
turned back by some half-invisible obstacle. Sometimes—by no means quite
always—we can concatenate the limiting causes,—deduce them from
something known and anterior, but they are almost always present or
impending. As Leigh Hunt is the most catholic of critics, so Jeffrey is
almost the most sectarian: the very shibboleths of his sectarianism
being arbitrarily combined, and to a great extent peculiar to
himself.[557]

[Sidenote: _Hallam._]

Let us conclude the chapter with a figure scarcely less representative
of the anti-enthusiast school of critics, and much more agreeable than
either Gifford or Jeffrey. To the English student of literary history
and of literary criticism, Henry Hallam must always be a name _clarum et
venerabile_; nor—as has been so often pointed out in these pages, and as
unfortunately it seems still so often necessary[558] to point out—need
disagreement with a great many of his own critical judgments and belief
that—for those who merely swallow such judgments whole—he is not the
safest of critical teachers, interfere with such due homage. [Sidenote:
_His achievement._] For Hallam was our first master in English of the
true comparative-historical study of literature—the study without which,
as one main result of this volume should be to show, all criticism is
now unsatisfactory, and the special variety of criticism which has been
cultivated for the last century most dangerously delusive. His
Introduction to the _Literature of Europe_, with its sketch of mediæval
and its fuller treatment of Renaissance and seventeenth-century
Literature, is the earliest book of the kind in our language: it is not
far from being, to this day, the best book of the kind in any.

[Sidenote: _Its merits_]

A first attempt of its sort (it cannot be said here with too much
frankness and conviction) can even less than any other book be
faultless: and it is almost a sufficient proof of Hallam’s greatness
that his faults are not greater. Some things, indeed, that seem to me
faults may not even seem to be so at all to others. He was aware that he
must “pass over or partially touch” some departments of at any rate
so-called literature; but his preference or rejection may seem somewhat
remarkable. Few will quarrel, at least from my point of view, with the
very large space given to mere “scholars,” but it is surely strange that
a historian should have thought History of secondary importance, while
according ample space not only to Philosophy and Theology, but even to
Anatomy and Mathematics. A more serious and a more indisputable blemish
is the scanty and second-hand character of his account of mediæval
literature, which he might almost as well have omitted altogether. It
cannot be too peremptorily laid down that second-hand accounts of
literature are absolutely devoid of any value whatever:—the best and
latest authorities become equally “not evidence” with the stalest and
worst. [Sidenote: _and defects._] Hallam was aware of this principle to
some extent, and he almost states it, though of course in his own more
measured way, and with reference to quotation mainly, in his preface.
But his first chapter is really nothing but a tissue of references to
Herder and Eichhorn, Meiners and Fleury, with original remarks which do
not console us. The account of Boethius at the very beginning is a
pretty piece of rhetoric, but, as the Germans would say, not in the
least “ingoing.” It is a horrible heresy to say[559] that “It is
sufficient to look at any extracts” from the Dark Ages “to see the
justice of this censure,” for no collection of extracts will justify the
_formation_ of any critical opinion whatsoever, though it may support,
or at least illustrate, one formed from reading whole works.

[Sidenote: _In general distribution and treatment._]

Further, in a note of Hallam’s[560] I think may be found the origin of
Mr Arnold’s too exclusive preference for “the best and principal” things
and his disparagement of the historic estimate, though I trust that Mr
Arnold[561] would not have shared Hallam’s contempt, equally superfine
and superficial, for the “barbarous Latin” of the Dark Ages. Finally, it
is difficult to conceive a more inadequate reference to one of the most
epoch-making of European poems (which is at the same time in its earlier
part one of not the least charming) than the words “A very celebrated
poem, the _Roman de la Rose_, had introduced an unfortunate taste for
allegory in verse, from which France did not extricate herself for
several generations.” It is all the worse because nothing in it is
positively untrue.

It may be said to be unjust to dwell on what is avowedly a mere
overture: but unluckily, when Hallam comes to his subject proper, all
trace of second-hand treatment does not disappear. The part played by
direct examination becomes very much larger; and the writer’s reading is
a matter of just admiration, nor does he ever for one moment pretend to
have read what he has not. But he has no scruple in supplementing his
reading at second-hand, or even in doubling his own frequently excellent
judgments with long quoted passages from writers like Bouterwek.
Further, the surprise which has been hinted above as to his admissions
and exclusions, and at his relative admissions in point of departments,
may perhaps after a time change into a disappointed conviction that his
first interest did not lie in literature, as literature, at all; but in
politics ecclesiastical and civil, juristics, moral and other
philosophy, and the like. I am inclined to think that Bacon, Descartes,
Hobbes, and Grotius have, between them, more space than is devoted to
all Hallam’s figures in _belles lettres_ from Rabelais to Dryden.

[Sidenote: _In some particular instances._]

I could support this with a very large number of _pièces_ if it were
necessary; but a few must suffice, and in those few we shall find a
further count against Hallam arising. Note, for instance, his
indorsement of Meiners' complaint that Politian “did not scruple to take
words from such writers as Apuleius and Tertullian,” an indorsement
which in principle runs to the full folly of Ciceronianism, and with
which it is well to couple and perpend the round assertion elsewhere
that Italian is—even it would seem for Italians—an inferior literary
instrument to Latin. Secondly, take the astounding suggestion that the
_Epistolæ Obscurorum Virorum_ “surely” have “not much intrinsic merit,”
and the apparent dismissal of them as “a mass of vapid nonsense and bad
grammar.” As if the very vapidity of the nonsense did not give the
savour, and the badness of the grammar were not the charm! Here again
another judgment (on the _Satire Menippée_) clinches the inference that
Hallam’s taste for humour was small. If he is not uncomplimentary, he is
strikingly inadequate, on Marot: and in regard to the Pléiade he simply
follows the French to do evil, and as elsewhere puts himself under the
guidance of—La Harpe! Few “heroic enthusiasts” will read his longer and
more appreciative notice of Spenser without perceiving “some want, some
coldness” in it; fewer will even expect not to find these privations in
that of Donne. But the shortest of his shortcomings are reached in his
article on Browne, and in part of that on Shakespeare. In the latter the
famous sentence on the Sonnets is not, I think, so unforgivable as the
slander on Juliet;[562] in the former one can simply quote in silence of
comment. “His style is not flowing, but vigorous; his choice of words
not elegant, and even approaching to barbarism in English phrase: yet
there is an impressiveness, an air of reflection and serenity, in
Browne’s writings which redeem many of his faults.”[563] The sentence
that “_Gondibert_ is better worth reading than _The Purple Island_,
though it may have less of that which distinguishes a poet from another
man”—in other words, that an unpoetical poem is better worth reading
than a poetical one—is sufficiently tell-tale. It is not surprising,
after it, that Hallam speaks respectfully of Rymer—a point where
Macaulay, so often his disciple, fortunately left him.

[Sidenote: _His central weakness,_]

Something, it has been said, will inevitably emerge from these
utterances on a tolerably intelligent consideration. Hallam has abundant
erudition, much judicial quality, a shrewdness which generally guides
him more or less right in points of fact; sense; fairness; freedom from
caprice—even (except as regards the Middle Ages, and especially mediæval
Latin and its ancestors back to the late Silver Age) a certain power of
regarding literature impartially. But he has, as is so often done (he
alludes to the fact himself somewhere), spoken his own doom in words
which he applies (with remarkable injustice as it happens) to
Fontenelle. He has “cool good sense, and an incapacity, by natural
privation, of feeling the highest excellence in works of taste.”

[Sidenote: _and the value left by it._]

In short, “The Act of God”: and for such acts it is as unreasonable as
it is indecent to blame their victims. But at the same time we may carry
our forbearance to natural privations too far by accepting blind men as
guides in precipitous countries, or using as a bloodhound a dog who has
no scent. And therefore it is impossible to assign to Hallam a high
place as a critic. He may be—he is—useful even in this respect as a
check and a reminder of the views which once were taken by men of wide
information, excellent discipline, literary disposition, and (where it
was not seared or paralysed) positive taste; but he will not soon
recover any other value. Even thus he is to a critic that always
critically estimable thing a _point de repère_, and in the kindred but
not identical function of literary historian, the praise which was given
to him at the opening of this notice may be maintained in spite of, and
not inconsistently with, anything that has been said meanwhile.[564]

Nay, more, Specialism has made such inroads upon us—has bondaged the
land to such hordes of robber-barons—that we may not soon expect again,
and may even regard with a tender _desiderium_, the width, the justice,
the far-reaching and self-sufficing survey and sovereignty of Hallam.




                              CHAPTER II.

                         MIL-HUIT-CENT-TRENTE.

THE ‘GLOBE’—CHARLES DE RÉMUSAT, VITET, J. J. AMPÈRE—SAINTE-BEUVE: HIS
    TOPOGRAPHY— THE EARLIER ARTICLES—3‘PORTRAITS LITTÉRAIRES’ AND
    ‘PORTRAITS DE FEMMES’— THE ‘PORTRAITS CONTEMPORAINS’—HE “ARRIVES”—
    PORT-ROYAL, ITS LITERARY EPISODES—ON RACINE— ‘CHATEAUBRIAND ET SON
    GROUPE LITTÉRAIRE’— FAULTS FOUND WITH IT—ITS EXTRAORDINARY MERITS,
    AND FINAL “DICTA”— THE ‘CAUSERIES’ AT LAST—THEIR LENGTH, ETC.—
    BRICKS OF THE HOUSE—HIS OCCASIONAL POLEMIC— THE ‘NOUVEAUX LUNDIS’—
    THE CONCLUSION OF THIS MATTER— MICHELET AND QUINET—HUGO—‘WILLIAM
    SHAKESPEARE‘— ‘LITTÉRATURE ET PHILOSOPHIE’—THE ‘CROMWELL’ PREFACE,
    AND THAT TO THE ‘ORIENTALES’— CAPITAL POSITION OF THIS LATTER—THE
    “WORK”— NISARD: HIS ‘ÆGRI SOMNIA’—HIS ‘ESSAIS SUR LE ROMANTISME’—
    THEIR “CULPA MAXIMA”—GAUTIER—HIS THEORY: “ART FOR ART’S SAKE,” ETC.—
    HIS PRACTICE: ‘LES GROTESQUES’—‘HISTOIRE DU ROMANTISME,’ ETC.—
    UBIQUITY OF FELICITY IN HIS CRITICISM—SAINT-MARC GIRARDIN— PLANCHE—
    WEIGHT OF HIS CRITICISM—MAGNIN—MÉRIMÉE.


[Sidenote: _The Globe._]

It is well known, even to not very careful students of French
literature, that the famous term which has been taken as the title of
this chapter is something of a misnomer,—that the still more famous
“representation of _Hernani_” was in effect the shouting after the
battle, not the battle itself. The pains which have been spent above on
the Empire Critics, greater and smaller, must have been most
ill-bestowed if they have not shown that the working of the world-spirit
had done already much of what had to be done—that the _i_'s only had to
be dotted and the _t_'s crossed, by the end of the third decade of the
nineteenth century. The crossing and dotting was done, as usual, with
some violence, and it attracted corresponding attention; but the letters
had been shaped long before. Dubois and Pierre Leroux had founded the
famous _Globe_—object of the admiration of Goethe and cradle of the
talent of Sainte-Beuve and others—in 1824. It furnishes comfort and
support to those who believe that criticism is nothing if not
philosophical, by the very strong philosophical colour which it took on.
Jouffroy was one of its chief pillars; and attention has often been
drawn to his tractate in it, _Comment les dogmes finissent_ (as to which
it can only be remarked that no dogma has ever died yet, and that every
dogma, as a natural product of something in human nature, is immortal
till human nature perishes), as a symptom and symbol of its literary as
of its other doctrines. [Sidenote: _Charles de Rémusat, Vitet, J. J.
Ampère._] We are here, however, only concerned with its strictly (if not
merely) literary contributors, Sainte-Beuve himself, Charles de Rémusat,
J. J. Ampère, Vitet, and the rest. Of Sainte-Beuve we shall have plenty
to say presently; the rest need not delay us long. The extraordinarily
brilliant talents of Charles de Rémusat[565] were always touching
literature: but philosophy and politics constantly drew him away from
the Muses proper, though whether he talks of Abelard or of Anselm, of
Bacon or of Channing, he is never negligible. Vitet became a politician
and an antiquary chiefly, but has left at least one remarkable literary
document in his well-known essay on the _Chanson de Roland_.[566] As for
J. J. Ampère, he supplemented and furthered the study of foreign
literatures, which Villemain had made almost obligatory, by an unusual
frequentation of foreign countries; and besides some excellent work on
the literary history (especially in mediæval times) of his own language,
wrote many books of literary travel.

On the whole, however (for Sainte-Beuve grew out of and far above his
_Globe_ stage), the _general_ interest of the reviewing in this paper is
superior to that of its component parts as criticisms and its individual
authors as critics. Those who now read Goethe’s remarks on it to
Eckermann[567] may, if they neglect the historic estimate, be a little
puzzled at the great German’s enthusiasm. He was right, however, as, in
a general way, he usually was. These young men took literature with a
wider knowledge and purview of it than the old critics had brought to
bear, and with very much less subservience to particular theory as to
what the book _ought to be_, and a more obliging though quite
independent attention to what it _was_. Their “eclecticism” (which was
philosophically the tone or ticket of their paper) adapted itself
especially well to these literary exercitations: indeed Eclecticism is
never so well justified of any of her necessarily mixed family as in
literature. But their greatest is their greatest by so far, that we may
well turn to him.

[Sidenote: _Sainte-Beuve: his topography._]

Sainte-Beuve was not infrequently seized with an amiable and very
convenient fancy for constructing small retrospective guides and clues
to the mighty maze of his fifty or sixty volumes of critical essays. The
most definite and important, written in September 1861, just at the
beginning of the _Nouveaux Lundis_, and appended to the second volume of
the Garnier edition of _Portraits Littéraires_, distributes his whole
career under heads. First comes his novitiate in the _Globe_ up to 1827;
then the Romantic campaign of the _Ronsard_, the _Tableau du Seizième
Siècle_, and the articles of 1828-29; then the nearly twenty years’
stretch of his contributions (preserved in the _Portraits Littéraires_
themselves and the _Portraits Contemporains_) to the _Revue des Deux
Mondes_, with _Port-Royal_ as a solid cut-and-come-again accompaniment;
then _Chateaubriand et son Groupe_; then the _Causeries du Lundi_
properly so called, and, lastly, the series which he was beginning as he
wrote. The work of the first period of which he speaks with some
disdain—_ce ne sont que des essais sans importance_—he never actually
republished; but towards the end of his life he repented and intended to
do so, and such part of it as could be recovered appeared posthumously,
with a good many waifs and strays of other kinds, as _Premiers Lundis_.
If to these we add the _Étude sur Virgile_[568] and perhaps the _P. J.
Proudhon_,[569] we shall nearly have exhausted his available stores, and
quite, I think, those of critical interest.[570]

[Sidenote: _The earlier articles._]

The earliest detachment of this great army, as presented in that
_régiment de marche_ the _Premiers Lundis_ (made up of all sort of
things from these raw recruits to the poor old veterans of Senate-speech
more than forty years later), might deserve their author’s modest or
merciless sentence from the severe point of view of his greatest pupil.
They are certainly not “chief and principal things” in themselves.
Sainte-Beuve was very young (barely twenty) when he began to write them,
and, as we have said, it is nearly impossible for a very young critic to
be a very good critic, though it is deplorably possible for a rather old
one to be more than rather bad. Some of them are so short as to give no
room for much display of individual and original talent. Sometimes they
deal with things ephemeral, and now forgotten, in a merely journalist
fashion. Sometimes, as in the dealing with Scott’s _Napoleon_,
inevitable and insuperable prejudices and preoccupations come in. One
may even admit frankly that, _nonnunquam_, there are symptoms which lead
one to understand, after a fashion, the charges of dulness[571] and of
_galimatias_ which were brought against Sainte-Beuve by persons from
Balzac[572] downwards, and which have sometimes seemed mere spiteful
lunacy to readers of the _Causeries_ at their most brilliant period
only. But to the expert there is unmistakable and not merely fancied
_quality_ even here. There is already the indefinable, but in previous
critics so unfortunately rare, desire to appreciate, to understand.
There is almost always a sober judgment; not seldom a delicate if rather
tentative subtlety. Above all, there are signs of something very
different from the sham omniscience which is such a temptation to the
young reviewer,—of a range and width of reading, classical, modern,
foreign, most surprising and most unusual at the time.

The _Tableau_,[573] with its associated selection of Ronsard, and some
other matter appended to its later editions, is quite a landmark in
French literary history. It turned (or rather marked the turning of) the
tide in regard to sixteenth-century literature, interested the youth of
the day in the _Pléiade_, stimulated the new prosodical movements, did
much else. But its author’s powers were immature: and there is not a
great deal of the highest critical importance in its individual
utterances and judgments. Perhaps the most noteworthy is the statement
in the _Preface_ that “L’Art consacre et purifie tout ce qu’il touche”—a
companion axiom to the Preface of the _Orientales_, which neither critic
nor poet would have fully indorsed in their later days, though many of
their followers would.

[Sidenote: Portraits Littéraires _and_ Portraits de Femmes.]

The _Portraits Littéraires_, with its satellite or tow-boat the
_Portraits de Femmes_, appears to have been a sort of favourite with
Sainte-Beuve. He rearranged it early from the original _Critiques et
Portraits Littéraires_;[574] he sifted out the _Portraits de Femmes_, as
if to concentrate special attention on them; he added from time to time
appetising and really important bonuses and _primes_ of appendices,
_Pensées_, personal confidences, and the like. A good deal of his
best-known work is in the four volumes (including the _Femmes_) as they
are now[575] current: and probably the collection meets the taste, of
the general reader at least, as well as any other of his numerous
collections, if not better. This, I venture to think,—using a phrase of
an author who would probably not have agreed with me in this particular
instance,—is because the general reader “does not want criticism,” or
does not want it first of all. Sainte-Beuve, who knew everything, and
cared not to conceal it, knew, as the general reader does not know, that
the _causerie_, whether in volume- or essay-form, of mingled biography
and criticism, was of English, not French invention: and he confesses
that he longed to imitate it. He did so, and carried it even beyond
Johnson: but he was frequently tempted to let the biography and the
personality rather swamp the criticism, and I think he has done so here.
In the _Portraits de Femmes_ especially, be it gallantry, gossip-loving,
or God knows what, though there may be much interest, there is
uncommonly little criticism, even on La Rochefoucauld, who presents
himself in the middle of the galaxy with a singular and sultanesque
intrusion. On some of the subjects, such as Mme. de Longueville, there
could be none: even on Mme. de Sévigné and Mme. de Staël, where the
opportunities were infinite, there is little; and where there is most,
as in the case of Pauline de Meulan (Mme. Guizot), it is where we care
least about it. Of history and life plenty, and therefore of amusement
much; of criticism very little.

Life and its farrago—of which I desire not to speak disrespectfully more
than of any other equator, but which are not my subject—have rather less
exclusive hold in the _Portraits Littéraires_ proper and segregated, but
still a greater hold than literature. In those days Sainte-Beuve, as he
himself more than once confesses, was even more of a philosopher than of
a _littérateur_. There are of course exceptions, where the past
greatness of the author takes the future greatness of the critic by
storm beforehand, and forces acquaintance and recognition from its
destined brother. Even in these cases one often feels that the critic
“is not ready”—that the hour has not fully come. The early and strongly
“Romantic” articles on the great classics of the seventeenth century,
which open the first volume, are not merely wrong with the crudity of
early partisanship, as he himself represents them. Indeed in this
respect they are hardly wrong at all. But they are not right in the
right way. Except the very remarkable piece, “Du Génie Critique et de
Bayle,” where the vocation asserted itself, there is hardly one of them
(if even this is) worthy of Sainte-Beuve. The “Diderot,” to make a move
forward, is capital on the man, a little short of capital on the writer.
The best critical thing in the volume is the “Nodier”—much later in date
(1840) than the rest of its contents. The second volume, which has
something of this advantage, in point of time, contains much better
things:—the well-known “Molière,” the long (some would say the
disproportionately long) “Fontanes,” the “Joseph de Maistre,”[576] the
“Naudé,” and a delightful paper on Aloysius Bertrand of _Gaspard de la
Nuit_,[577] which combines the old Romantic enthusiasm with the acquired
craftsmanship. The third, better still in this latter respect, has less
interesting subjects, except in the case of the “Theocritus” and the
“Mlle. Aissé,” which is again a “Portrait de Femme,” hardly at all
literary. A sacred shame invades me at even appearing to speak
disrespectfully of this book. Compared with anything not of its
author’s, and not of that author’s at a future time, it would be very
great: but its greater younger brothers are its enemies.

[Sidenote: _The_ Portraits Contemporains.]

Still not of these is the _Portraits Contemporains_. One feels inclined
to say at the beginning, and perhaps not disinclined to repeat the
saying at the end, that the title announces an attempt foredoomed to
failure.[578] It is almost inevitable that a contemporary portrait in
literature should fail to be a likeness, should be at best a _charge_,
from one point of view or another. Sainte-Beuve himself in one place
(with a naïveté more characteristic of him than those who have not read
him very long and very carefully may think, but seldom so openly
expressed) admits that his sitters had an awkward trick of falsifying
his presentations. He had traced out for them, more or less early in
their career, that career as they _ought_ to pursue it; but lo! they
would follow their own stars, and not his tracings and indications. This
is one danger, and a common, if not universal one, with its result,—not
often realised in Sainte-Beuve’s own case, but constantly in that of
smaller critics,—that the prophet loses his temper with these
disobedient ducklings, and rates them, not because they behave badly,
but because they behave in a way different from that which he expected
and wished. But more dangerous still, and less to be avoided even by the
staunchest and most vigilant censors, are those insidious, innumerable,
ineluctable personal or partisan differences and prejudices which dazzle
and trouble the contemporary’s eyes: and, worst perhaps of all, that
incurable “too-nearness,” that hopeless lack of the firm perspective of
the past, which clings to him, and will not let him attain to clearness
and the Whole. Accordingly the _Portraits Contemporains_ are, with the
_Portraits Littéraires_, the most unequal of Sainte-Beuve’s work, and
all the more often disappointing because of the contemporaneity.

That reserve, indeed, which was made at the end of the notice of the
_Portraits Littéraires_ is even more imperatively called for here, and
it is most important that while recognising that the real Sainte-Beuve—
the plenilune—is as yet but crescent, we should recognise his brightness
and his crescency. It is, for instance, not merely hasty, but
fundamentally uncritical, to exclaim at the length, the fulness, the
cordiality, with which figures like Fontanes, Fauriel, Daunou are
treated; and to contrast, with abomination, the hesitancy, the grudging,
the reserves, in the case not merely of Hugo,[579] but of Vigny,
Lamartine, even Musset, the roughness on Balzac, the comparative respect
paid to Sue, and the comparatively cavalier treatment long accorded to
Gautier. Even in regard to the great stone of stumbling, it is
necessary, for us who were born later, to remember that however ardent
in the _chevelu_ and _gilet rouge_ and _hierro!_ manner we may think we
should have been if we had been born earlier, the Hugo of the time
before the _Châtiments_, and the _Contemplations_, and the _Legénde_,
great as he is, is not the Hugo of that glorious trinity. As for the
Empire Critics, no impatience at their disproportionate allowance ought
to prevent acknowledgment of Sainte-Beuve’s rare equity and true
critical spirit towards the immediate predecessors with whom he did
_not_ agree—a thing, as we have seen, deplorably rare in criticism.

Indeed, save in that Supreme Court of Critical History where the dignity
of the place excuses the personal insignificance of the judge, and puts
the greatest author on his defence, apology for these five volumes would
be needless, and almost impertinent. They certainly need not fear assay
either of pieces or of passages. In the First, where most of the dubious
places occur, where the judgment is most immature, and the

style most inclined to the jargonish,[580] the “Senancour,” and in part
the “Lamennais,” demand special notice, while the opening of the
“Béranger,” with its sketch of the _causerie_ method, is of extreme
interest, and the frequent references to English writers[581] show us
already the largeness of the critic’s equipment. The Second is perhaps
to be more cordially welcomed for the miscellanies at its end (including
the striking critical imaginations put into the mouths of Diderot and
Hazlitt) than for any of its more imposing constituents. The “Balzac”
article, though it is in the main just, has a harshness and a touch of
personal rudeness about it which are very unusual in Sainte-Beuve, and
not quite explicable. The novelist might certainly be excused for
thinking it wantonly uncivil. It is a little distressing, too, to read
the hostile appendix which Sainte-Beuve ill-advisedly put to his
“Montalembert” paper. But “_Misères que tout cela!_” The “Ballenche” and
the “Villemain,” the “Mme. Desbordes-Valmore” and the “Ulric
Guttinguer,”[582] nearly, if not quite, take the taste out. In vol.
iii., an extremely interesting opening on Vinet, and a good close on
Mérimée, hold between them things even better and sometimes well known—
the “Töpffer,” the “Xavier de Mestre,” the “Jasmin,” the “J. J. Ampère”—
and show, in the “Magnin” and elsewhere, that admirably _horizontal_
view of all periods of French literature which Sainte-Beuve was almost
the first to take, and in which he has had far too few followers,
whether in regard to French literature or others.

This reappears in the “Fauriel,”[583] which takes up nearly a third of
vol. iv., and is there accompanied by an excellent paper on Barante, a
longer but much less capital one on Thiers, two of Sainte-Beuve’s best
known pieces on Leopardi and Parny, and one—for us—of peculiar interest
on Daunou, containing perhaps the most vivid, and at the same time
delicate, sketch in existence of the latest type of Neo-classic critic
in France, before M. Brunetière’s revival sixty years later,—a type
without La Harpe’s exaggeration and caricature, with a certain mildness
and toleration towards the newer things, but secretly and _saturatedly_
convinced that Reason is the Goddess of Literature, that fine verse _is_
“almost as good as fine prose,” and that fineness in both consists of
absolute good sense, logical connection, grammatical impeccability, and
a horror of the _verbum inusitatum_. In this, too, the later and more
perfect manner is increasingly present throughout; and, naturally, still
more so in the Fifth, where the dates bring us to the very eve of the
great period itself, and the essays are sometimes hardly distinguishable
from the work thereof. The very best of these, perhaps, are the three
classical pieces (for Sainte-Beuve was never prudish about titles, and
not more than half of the Portraits in this volume deal with
contemporaries in any sense) on Homer, Apollonius Rhodius, and Meleager,
in which, not for the first time, but for the first time in nearly or
quite his full force, he once more makes a new departure in criticism by
handling antiquity in true _causerie_ style. But the “Desaugiers,” the
“Louise Labé,” and the “Casimir Delavigne” are also noteworthy, while
the paper on Gautier’s _Les Grotesques_, a little meticulous and
pedagogic in parts, and written in avowed protest of a mild kind, is
still more so.[584]

[Sidenote: _He “arrives.”_]

In fact, by about 1845[585] he had very nearly developed his full
powers, and he was shaking off the awkward transition state when he had
ceased to be _romantique à plusieurs_ (he never was _à tous_) _crins_,
and not yet become himself, and himself only. He had almost accomplished
the _causerie_, the mixture of biography, and criticism, and “talk about
it,” which Dryden, I maintain, is the first to have actually hit upon,
which Johnson had strengthened but a little stiffened in the _Lives_,
and which he himself re-fashioned by taking hints of depth and insight
from Coleridge and the English Companions, touches of grace and
_engouement_ out of a score of French eighteenth-century critics, from
Fontenelle and Diderot down to Fontanes and Daunou, adding knowledge of
literary history, and a not too peremptory theory of time and _milieu_,
from the Germans and the ambient air, enthusiasm from the still
smouldering hearth of the deserted _cénacle_, and that magic and
indefinable dose, that “little of my own sauce,” as Mrs Tibbs has it,
which genius provides, and of which it keeps the secret. His ability to
concoct this mixture, or rather to produce this new organism, had been
by this time almost fully shown; but the final proof was given, and the
new kind was definitely named and sent abroad, only after the
composition of the most substantive work (except _Port-Royal_) which he
had yet attempted, and the best—itself displaying the gifts he had now
acquired in the fullest measure. Probably the critical moment was
hastened, as so often happens, by an external catastrophe, the upset of
the July Monarchy, and by that transplantation into Belgium for a time
which, though he has put the best face on it, was certainly an exile,
and by no means wholly a voluntary one.

[Sidenote: _Port-Royal,_]

We must, however, first take some notice of _Port-Royal_, which, either
by cause or coincidence, was also the product of a journey, if not an
exile, being originally delivered in the form of lectures at Lausanne.
It[586] is, of course, the most important and substantive single work of
its author—the only one, in fact, to which the older and more exacting
definition of a _book_ would have shown itself complaisant. It occupied,
with completions and revisions, twenty years of his life; it contains
perhaps the most elaborate and masterly exposition of that system of
combined literary, historical, and social inquiry into the life of a
period which he did so much to introduce, and so much more to establish
as a literary Kind; and it expresses and registers notably those changes
of opinion which made him, in the last two decades of his life, an
exponent of an almost entirely _irreligious_ view of life itself. With
this aspect of it we do not here concern ourselves; but the book has far
too much which does directly concern us, in the strictest construction
of our own plan, not to receive detailed attention.

[Sidenote: _its literary episodes._]

I do not know that those “older and more exacting definitions,” which
have been just referred to, would pass, without demur, the features
which make it of this importance to us. It is true that many, if not
most, of the more distinguished men of letters of that century which, in
the general judgment, has been regarded as the greatest century of
letters in France, had more or less connection with Port Royal: nay,
more, that not a few of the Port Royalists of the outer and even inner
circles were great men of letters themselves. But whether this entirely
justifies (to take examples from the first two volumes only) the
inclusion in the book of analyses of _Polyeucte_ and _Saint-Genest_,
which would be ample for extensive monographs on Corneille and Rotrou
respectively,—of an elaborate study of the elder Balzac of which the
same may be said,—is a very arguable point. Still, the inclusion gives
us the book; and, even if it did not, I am not inclined to be
strait-laced on these points, or to chicane about the relation of the
episodes to the epic.

Let us then be as kind to Sainte-Beuve as he was to himself, and admit
what (feeling, I suppose, uneasy) he pleads at vol. ii. p. 107, “Nous
voici, ce semble, bien loin de Port Royal; pas si loin que l’on croit”—
that the spirit of the two plays is quite Port-Royalist, that Balzac
wrote letters to M. de Saint-Cyran (so he did to most people, but no
matter), that Pascal, Nicole, Racine come in of course; that even the
_Mémoires de Grammont_ are not quite extraneous, for was not _la belle_
Hamilton herself (despite her _nez retroussé_ and her Cupid’s-bow mouth)
educated there? We are, in short, to take our literary goods as we find
them, and as fate and the author provide: and they certainly provide
them in plenty. No detailed examinations of Sainte-Beuve’s are more
careful than those of the two plays. If he is a little hard, in the
text, on that Christian (and semi-Gascon) Socrates, and writer of most
handsome letters, who dwelt on the banks of the Charente, he repairs it
in an appendix. The references to minor Louis XIII. literature (though
injured by Sainte-Beuve’s dislike to quaintness) are never to be missed:
and it is needless to say the same of the whole dealing with Pascal, and
of the chapters devoted to the famous labours of the Port-Royalists
themselves, in literary and philosophical education. Tillemont, if not
exactly a lion in literature, is one of the greatest of lion’s providers
therein, and Nicole cannot be denied the title of man of letters.
Malebranche comes in as an opponent, Racine as a pupil, though as an
ungrateful pupil: and on all these and others Sainte-Beuve indulges in
literary excursus of all but his best kind.

[Sidenote: _On Racine._]

The Racine passage is the best worth dwelling on of these, because what
Frenchmen say on Racine is always interesting. We know, of course,
beforehand that Sainte-Beuve will be, to a certain extent,
_juste-milieu_,—that he will neither be of those who denounce with rage,
nor deplore with pity or contempt, the poor foreigners who cannot hear
the celestial music of the great _doucereux_, nor of those who approach
more or less nearly to the view of the poor foreigners themselves. But
the piece is specially interesting because it is perhaps the most
distinct general retractation of the critic’s ultra-Romantic creed, and
because it expresses much the same views as those (very probably derived
from it) of Mr Arnold. You must not, says Sainte-Beuve, attempt to judge
Racine by _passages_; there Hugo, Lamartine, even much lesser moderns
will beat him. You must judge the whole, and take into consideration the
support which each part gives to, and in turn derives from, the others.
Nay, more, Racine is “moins imprévu, moins éclatant, moins héroïque,
moins transportant” than Corneille, but more “equal,” &c. “L’unité,
l’ensemble chez Racine se subordonne tout.” Sainte-Beuve even thinks
that he could have done the many poetic things that he did not do as
well as those which he did, and that in them (here we may all agree) “on
aurait le même Racine.” But did he not lose something under the
desperate hook of Boileau? Perhaps. “Il n’avait pas un démon déterminé.”
You can understand him at once as you cannot Shakespeare or Molière. He
presents the perfection of poetic style, _même pour ceux qui n’aiment
pas essentiellement la poésie_. And the critic, with what some, I
suppose, would call a touch of his “perfidy,” adds, “Là, c’est le point
faible, s’il en est un.” Let us rather say that, while all reasonable
praise of Racine may be read in the lines of this criticism, all
reasonable dispraise of him may be read between those lines.

[Sidenote: Chateaubriand et son Groupe Littéraire.]

The great critical truth, that not merely is the tongue of the critic
loosed but his eyes are opened by the death of his subject, has seldom
been better illustrated than by the volumes entitled _Chateaubriand et
son Groupe Littéraire_, originally delivered as lectures at Liége when
Sainte-Beuve had left France to the March-haredom of the Second
Republic. Of course we must remember that he had had more than twenty
years of critical practice wherein to grow in critical wisdom and
stature; that in the last sixteen or seventeen, especially, since he had
shed his Saint-Simonian and Lamennaisian crotchets, he had (losing some
fancy and enthusiasm with them) acquired immensely greater knowledge,
critical delicacy, critical insight in most ways; and that, accordingly,
the _Portraits_ and other pieces of the ’Forties are, in almost every
respect except romantic and poetic _furia_, superior to those of the
’Thirties. But this will not entirely account for the excellence of the
_Chateaubriand_, which is a sort of central “broad” in the stream of
Sainte-Beuve’s criticism, from which it flows thereafter ever deeper,
wider, and clearer. The book indeed is not—what book, and especially
what critical book, is?—to be praised unreservedly or with very slight
reserves. The common accusations of “envy,” “treachery,” “malignity,”
“intolerance of greatness,” and the like, brought against Sainte-Beuve,
are exaggerated at the best, and at the worst simply silly. They come
partly from the general dislike and suspicion of the critic, who is a
critic wholly or mainly, partly from unintelligent, if not quite
ungenerous partisanship, partly from the most polluted of all sources,
personal and spiteful gossip. But, as nearly always happens, there is
some shred of justification for them, and the matter is important enough
to be dealt with once for all here.

[Sidenote: _Faults found with it._]

Rarely—so rarely that it is an almost unknown event—shall a man
practise, as Sainte-Beuve had for years and decades been practising,
criticism of his contemporaries and in many cases friends, without
exciting ill-feeling. But that ill-feeling becomes still more certain,
and its complexion is likely to be darker, when the criticism is of the
peculiar character which it is Sainte-Beuve’s greatest claim in the
general view (not quite in mine) to have perfected, if not actually
invented. It is true that, in the case of his living subjects, he moves
about, among the extra-literary personal traits, which it is his delight
to assemble and to group beside the literary details in heightening or
contrasting light, with a cat-like dexterity. But even cats sometimes
upset things: and the things among which Sainte-Beuve moved were much
more ticklish and unstable than the objects of the cat’s legerde_pied_.
Moreover, he actually had, as some, though by no means all other great
critics have had, a certain predilection for the secondary. He never
quite attains to the Longinian soundness of view on the
faults-and-beauties question; and it is particularly unfortunate that
the two greatest men of letters of his own time and country,
Chateaubriand and Victor Hugo, were men who specially require a
Longinian judgment. Nor am I disposed to deny that his attitude towards
the great _Beltenebroso_ of French Literature “doth something smack;
doth a little grow to.” Sainte-Beuve’s strange Bonapartism—the strangest
instance[587] of that most incomprehensible of political faiths—may have
had a little to do with this: but one suspects, putting gossip aside,
something more. There was, no doubt, much injustice in the too famous
“Mérimée était gentilhomme: Sainte-Beuve ne l'était pas,” but there was
an infinitesimal something in it.[588]

Again, to pass to a less “scabrous” subject, the scheme of the book
leaves a very little to desire: it may be argued, with some justice,
that Sainte-Beuve might better have proceeded entirely by the
planet-and-satellite method which he has partly adopted, instead of
sometimes mixing planet and satellite up, and sometimes keeping them
separate.

[Sidenote: _Its extraordinary merits,_]

But the critical merits of the book are quite extraordinary. I know
nothing earlier even approaching it as a comprehensive review of a great
writer; and the details are even more admirable than the admirable
_ensemble_. As for the latter, whatever may be Sainte-Beuve’s
insinuations, whatever his want of cordiality for Chateaubriand the man
and the politician,[589] it is impossible to charge him with the least
inadequacy as regards Chateaubriand the writer. Like others, he dwells a
little too much on the obligatory “images”; but unlike others, he does
not limit Chateaubriand’s powers to them; and he is more likely to be
thought by foreign critics excessive than grudging in his assignment and
recognition of those powers. He does the amplest justice to the immense
advance, in intensity and range, of “René” over Bernardin and Jean
Jacques. He sees perfectly well that the best and most characteristic
part of Byron is only Chateaubriand in English, in verse, with a few
more yataghans, and with no crucifixes. He has here gone nearer, I
think, to a real “grasp” of the writer, and the whole writer (alas! not
of nothing but the writer) than in any other instance.

As for the details, one simply punctuates the book with bravo!s, if
reading merely for enjoyment, and the note-book is never out of one’s
hand if one is reading for reference. It “enfists” you, as the French
say, at once, and it never lets the grasp go, but tightens it ever again
and again. Take the admirable conclusion of the second Lecture,[590]
with its indication of the way in which Chateaubriand combines the
appeal of ancient poetry, of mediæval romance, and of the new fancy for
nature, and turn, or rather come (for there should be no turning or
skipping in this book) to the justification of the last point in the
Fourth.[591]

[Sidenote: _and final_ dicta.]

But it is at the end of the Seventh lecture, in the special critique of
_Atala_, that Sainte-Beuve first, I think, shows the wonderful critical
mastery which was to distinguish him for the remaining twenty years of
his life; and the proofs multiply as we turn the pages. In whom
elsewhere—even in Coleridge—shall we find two such sentences, on the
_verso_ and _recto_ of the same leaf,[592] showing such different kinds
not merely of mastery but of supremacy as those that follow—the last of
the Eighth lecture, and, save for a mere bow to the audience, the first
of the Ninth? He has, in the first, been contrasting _Paul et Virginie_
(for which he, like almost all Frenchmen, has an affection
incomprehensible to us), and he has to admit the transcendence of its
successor. “Elle [Atala] gardait,” he says, “son ascendant troublant: au
milieu de toutes les reserves qu’une saine critique oppose, la flamme
divine y a passé.... On y sent le philtre—le poison qui, une fois connu,
ne se guérit pas; on emporte avec soi la flèche empoisonnée du désert.”
_Dixit!_ There are critics who feel the philtre and who carry the arrow
with them, and there are those who do not.

The other passage is, “Savoir bien lire un livre en le jugeant chemin
faisant, et sans cesser de le goûter, c’est presque tout l’art du
critique. Cet art consiste encore à comparer.... Faites cela, et
laissez-vous faire.” How different this cool prescription from the
enthusiasm of the last, and yet how equal in its finality!

I could bestow much more of my tediousness on the reader in regard to
this wonderful book: but its allotted space is nearly filled. Once only
do I find a pettiness, in fact a falsity, where[593] he carps at the
phrase, “A combien de rivages n’ai-je pas vu depuis se briser les mêmes
flots que je contemple ici,” in the truly Rymerian note, “Tout les flots
se ressemblent: mais ce ne sont pas les _mêmes_ flots, les _mêmes_
vagues qu’il voyait se briser en des lieux si divers.” The _poète mort
jeune_ in Sainte-Beuve (to use his own famous words) was _bien mort_
when he wrote this: and the critic had _not_ “felt the philtre.” Does
not the greater part of the power of the Angel of the Sea arise from
this very mysterious sense of the unity of wave from Pole to Equator,
and from coral to iceberg? The lands are broken, separated, isolated:
the “unplumbed, salt, estranging sea” is one and indivisible, an
unbroken link between the live self that sees it here and the dead self
that saw it far away and long ago.

But he seldom slips or nods thus. For happier things, note his
sketch[594] of the three manners in Chateaubriand, where he compares
Fontenelle’s notice of Corneille’s,[595] and might have compared
Milton’s; the confession that French is not “une langue qui aurait eu
l’accent et qui se souvenait d’avoir étée scandée”; the profound remarks
on the Kinds of Criticism;[596] the almost profounder remarks on the
different kinds of description.[597] I could multiply these instances
almost endlessly, but it is enough to say, or repeat, that if we had
nothing else of Sainte-Beuve’s it would place him in the first rank of
the critics of the world, and that it is perhaps the earliest book that
definitely does so.

[Sidenote: _The_ Causeries _at last_.]

Although the rest of Sainte-Beuve’s life certainly did not fail to
justify the immortal and invariable law that the gods never yet gave all
things to man at once, yet in the main it was exceptionally fortunate,
and the fortune was of the kind most important to our purpose. For once,
a man who could do a thing supremely was allowed to do it, under
conditions, if not absolutely ideal, yet exceptionally favourable. Had
he resisted the temptations of professorships and senatorships, he would
have been able, without any interruption, to devote himself entirely to
literary work of his own choosing, in his own house, without let or
hindrance, publicity or disturbance, without even the pressure (so
galling to some temperaments) of any fixed time and place of duty,
except the easily adjustable necessities of having his “copy” and his
proofs duly ready. Even of the avocations which he permitted himself,
the actual interference with his vocation was trifling. The reward in
mere money, though of course ludicrous in comparison with the rewards of
other professions or even arts, was a competence; and it freed him
completely from one of the most disagreeable penances of the working man
of letters, the necessity of stepping out of his proper sphere in order
to keep himself within it.

With this amiability of the Destinies, and with the man himself so
perfectly prepared as we have seen him to be, it is scarcely surprising
that the work should be altogether exceptional. It would require a
really “encyclopædic head” either to affirm or deny, with competence,
the proposition that it is the most complete and four-square batch of
work ever done by any craftsman: but I do not know where to look for its
rival, in any branch at least of literature. Criticism may or may not be
the lowest of such branches; it may or may not be unworthy even to be
called a branch. But of it, and barring the previous question, we shall
certainly look in vain anywhere for such an example, in quality and
quantity combined, as is presented by the _Causeries du Lundi_ and the
_Nouveaux Lundis_.

[Sidenote: _Their length, &c._]

I do not know whether the length of the average _causerie_ was directly
conditioned by the fact of its appearance in a daily newspaper[598]
instead of a Review, or whether Sainte-Beuve’s experience and instinct
combined, induced him to make it rather shorter, but much more uniform
in length, than his _Deux Mondes_ articles. This length is pretty
exactly twenty pages—a few articles being a little longer and a few a
little shorter, but the greater number coming very close to the score
of, say, 350 words each. It may be a superstition based on this great
practitioner’s practice, but I think the majority of his successors have
found that this length—say, from six to eight thousand words—is
singularly normal for the treatment of an average subject of the larger
literary kind. It ought not to weary the reader; it does not cramp the
writer; and it does not tempt him to undue expatiation. Occasionally
Sainte-Beuve, of course, doubled or trebled or even further multiplied
_causeries_ where the subject demanded it; but at first he did this very
seldom, and he never made it the rule. In selecting his subjects he
naturally preferred a new book when he could get it, if only as a “peg”:
and he had plenty of choice. His rejections, however, were sometimes
disappointing, particularly so in the case of M. Egger’s _History of
Greek Criticism_, which he had intended to take. He neither specially
chose nor specially rejected themes that he had already treated: and
sometimes, though not often, he reproduced parts of his old work. As to
the treatment, enough has been said of that above, or will be said
below. It was almost unique: it is still almost unmatched. As far as any
general scheme is extricable, it is the obvious one of a few general
remarks—not very seldom expanding into precious tractatules—of more or
less abstract criticism; a biographical sketch, anecdoted with special
view to literary influences; remarks, with more or less quotation, on
books and passages; and sometimes a sketch, usually rather shy and
suggestive than peremptory, of comparative “placing”—the comparison,
however, having been subtly presented throughout. But the method is
never stereotyped: and the variations are of the essence.

[Sidenote: _Bricks of the house._]

The hundreds of articles and the thousands of passages which these
eight-and-twenty volumes present are naturally difficult to deal with
after the method which has been here adopted; but a few pages may be
fairly devoted to a selection from the _notabilia_ with which “the sweet
compulsion” of reading them through again for the purpose has provided
me freshly. At the very beginning, and in the first volume, though it is
one of the most brilliant of all, Sainte-Beuve is rather militant: he
never became quite Olympian. The opening article on Saint-Marc
Girardin[599] (between whom and our critic there was always a little
friction) has a good deal of “malice” in the French, if not exactly in
the English, sense: and that which follows on Lamartine’s _Confidences_,
with a later one on _Raphael_, though just enough, is distinctly cruel,
and savours of political vengeance on the fallen dictator. But these
ticklish and disgustful contemporaneities give way to those perfect
studies of the Sévignés (if it be not profane to speak of that person in
the plural), the Hamiltons, the Jouberts, the Comines, the Firdousis,
which we associate most happily and most characteristically with
Sainte-Beuve. There is less, though there is some, of the wholly welcome
dealing with technically “ancient” literature: but there are two
consummate articles of “criticism in the second intention”—the papers on
“Villemain and Cousin as Men of Letters,” and on “Feletz, and Empire
Criticism.”

The second volume or semester of this Annus Mirabilis—for the two cover
the whole twelvemonth from October 1 to September 30, 1849-1850, with
exactly fifty-two articles told down for the fifty-two weeks[600]—
contains the famous and generous “Mlle. de Lespinasse”; the “Huet,”
which is perhaps as good an example as one can find of the whole in some
ways; the admirable “Chesterfield”; a wonderfully just “Mazarin”; the
“Gil Blas,” which will be reprinted with _Gil Blas_ for centuries; and
that magnanimous and yet not uncritical adjustment of coals of fire
which Sainte-Beuve set alight in honour of the death of Balzac,—all of
them varied, picked out, and set off by a profusion of studies of the
eighteenth century, less literary in substance but literary enough in
connection, and prefaced in one case, that of the “Madame du Châtelet,”
with a most ingenious link, conduit, or what shall we call it? of
explanatory connection between the purely literary and the merely
gossiping. If there is to be found, also, an extremely bitter-sweet
appendix on M. de Pontmartin, and an article on Chateaubriand, which is
a superfluity and a blunder after the great book, we can pardon them. No
other man has ever done such another year’s _darg_ in criticism.

We must not follow the rest of the twenty years or thereabouts with
equal precision, though few of them were less substantially filled. An
indication to those who do not know, a reminder to those who do, of
certain _sommités_ among the articles; and a small sheaf of specially
important passages, may lead us to the final summary of Sainte-Beuve’s
critical position and achievement.

A whole cluster of remarkable things opens the Third volume. The
“Rabelais” is practically the first piece of absolutely sane and
appreciative criticism on the subject, the starting-point and foundation
of what is now the accepted opinion of the competent. The “_Qu’est ce
qu’un classique?_” is one of those more general pieces of criticism in
which Sainte-Beuve does not go out of his way to indulge, but which he
does, when he does them, in a manner showing the superiority which
practice in actual “judging of authors” confers on its practitioners
when they “go up higher.” The “Rousseau” is almost equal to the
“Rabelais,” and it is not the first comer in criticism who can be just
to both. His social-historic studies of the seventeenth and the
eighteenth century serve as foils, and as intrinsically delightful
reading, though they are often on the fringes of literature itself. The
article on Latouche is a little ungenerous, and that on Fontenelle more
than a little inadequate; while I wish that Sainte-Beuve had not
indulged in a singularly vain and violent contrast between Camille
Desmoulins and Vauvenargues. But the “Pasquier,” the “Saint-Simon,” the
new “Diderot,” make amends.

[Sidenote: _His occasional polemic._]

And it is always so. There were squalls occasionally, as there were
especially certain to be, at the ticklish time, when the Second
Consulate or Presidency was passing, not quite ideally, into the Second
Empire. He need not have poured broadsides into popgunners like the
Staël-Hetzels and the Laurent-Pichats.[601] The first was a very useful
publisher and a respectable author of children’s books; I think I
remember some tolerable critical work of the second, apart from his
politics. But what is either to-day? what, much more, will either be a
hundred years hence, beside Sainte-Beuve? He knew Wordsworth: surely he
might have remembered that “our noisy _curs_ are” not even “moments in
the being of the Eternal Silence.” “They yap; what yap they? let them
yap.” For in some cases they can do nothing else: and in all the Silence
itself catches them very soon, if we do not lend them an echo.

In the Fourth volume, though the “Mirabeau” articles and the “Chamfort,”
the “Saint-Evremond et Ninon” and the “Marmontel” are charming in the
mixed kind, I think, for literature, the palm is due to that sentence—so
autobiographical and so much more than merely autobiographical—which
opens the “Moreau and Dupont” piece, “Je cause rarement ici de poésie,
precisément parceque je l’ai beaucoup aimée et que je l’aime encore plus
que toute chose.” _Quia multum amavi!_ And he does not derogate from
this attitude in the Fifth, where he welcomes Victor de Laprade and
Leconte de Lisle, while this also contains delightful things on
Raynouard, Rivarol, Retz, Patru, Gourville, and even the remarkable
person once called Le-Brun-_Pindare_. In the Sixth we go from Rollin to
La Reine Margot, from Bernardin and Courier to Saint Anselm backwards
and the Abbé Gerbet forwards, with, at the close, one article of special
interest here, Sainte-Beuve’s revised and in some ways _palinodic_
opinions on Boileau. The Seventh is mainly eighteenth century—
Montesquieu and the Président de Brosses, Franklin and Barthélemy, Grimm
(for whom, here as elsewhere, Sainte-Beuve makes strong fight against
the general, and, I am bound to say, in my judgment, the well-grounded,
distrust of him), Necker and Volney, with, to give us change from a
better time, Regnard and La Fontaine at front and close, Richelieu and
Saint François de Sales, Mérimée and Arnault, and the elder Marguerite.
On the last he is a little disappointing: and perhaps we might have
expected that he would be.

The Eighth, with many excellent examples of the usual
seventeenth-eighteenth century _causeries_, and with a most welcome
batch of mediæval studies on Joinville, on the _Roman de Renart_, on the
_Histoire Littéraire_—good to read even now, and priceless then—contains
an article, written with great care, to which an Englishman naturally
turns, and with which most Englishmen will be disappointed, that on
Gibbon. None of the usual causes could have blunted Sainte-Beuve’s
judgment here: yet it is blunted. Missing, in the one sense, what he
calls the _javelot_, the _coup de foudre_, the _cri haletant_—in other
words, the somewhat theatrical and rhetorical[602] touch of French, he
misses also, in the other, Gibbon’s _magnificence_, that sense of the
vast procession of events and that power of reproducing it, which gives
an almost poetic self-transcendence to an otherwise prosaic and
_philosophe_ nature. We all miss things, of course: but such a man as
Sainte-Beuve should not have missed such a thing as this. The
“Joinville,” however, which immediately follows, makes once more those
familiar amends; and the next volume (the Ninth) contains admirable
companions to it in the “Froissart” and the “Villehardouin,” this last
one of the author’s best. He had now started (to some though not to all
extents with advantage) dealing with one subject in several essays: and
most of this volume is so occupied. “Stendhal,” “Marivaux,” “Madame
Dacier,” with others, show his admirable flexibility. The Tenth is
perhaps less attractive, for except Agrippa d’Aubigné and one or two
others, its subjects are not as a rule of the first interest, and in one
Sainte-Beuve returns to Chateaubriand—not happily. But the Eleventh,
with a certain amount of “filling,”—the first collection stopped here,
and Sainte-Beuve had to plug the gap made by the removal of the index
when it was extended,—has at least two articles, or batches of articles,
of the first interest—those on Montluc and Cowper. _Ne fait pas ce tour
qui veut_—to appreciate equally, and almost at the same moment, the
greater d’Artagnan of Sienna and the patron of Puss.

As a matter of fact, the original enterprise of the weekly _Causerie_
did in a manner finish with this first issue. For five years
Sainte-Beuve had kept neck and neck with the enemy. His work afterwards
was more intermittent, and even underwent a cessation of some years when
he was lecturer at the École Normale, between 1857 and 1861. The last
four volumes of the actual _Causeries_ are made up from different
sources: though the bulk of the constituents are of the true breed.
Among them are some of Sainte-Beuve’s most interesting studies of the
past—“Ronsard” (revisited), “Saint Amant,” “Voiture,” “Vauvenargues,”
“Villon”—and some of his most famous papers on contemporaries, such as
those on Musset and the Guérins. The last volume of all contains two of
the most valuable of those invaluable papers on criticism in general, to
which we have drawn attention already, that on Nisard’s _History_ and
that on _La Tradition en Littérature_. But perhaps the special appeal of
these appendix-volumes is the appearance of articles on books and
authors that are still in a manner modern—on _Madame Bovary_, on
_Fanny_,[603] on M. de Banville, on M. Scherer.

[Sidenote: _The_ Nouveaux Lundis.]

And when the series began again regularly, after this interruption, with
the _Nouveaux Lundis_ in 1861, he formally promised or threatened a
recrudescence into criticism “truer” and “franker” and more regardless
of contemporary protest.

One may be sorry for this, even though the particular ashes are long
cooled. Although Sainte-Beuve’s “malignity” was, as has been said,
absurdly, and is still sometimes inexcusably, exaggerated, he was far
from free from those _iræ_ from which the something less than celestial
spirit of the critic so seldom escapes.[604] There is a sort of
“rankle,” a kind of distant growl of “That’s _my_ thunder,” in his
review at the time of M. Rigault’s _Querelle_, in his later obituary of
the author, and even elsewhere: the first paper of the _Nouveaux Lundis_
on Laprade is openly and almost rudely hostile: while the critic
proceeds later to exchange fresh broadsides with M. de Pontmartin.

Still, where the element of hostility or personality does not put flies
in the ointment, it is of course of the first interest to have such a
paper as, say, the “_Madame Bovary_” article, or the later one on
“Salammbô,” introductions to such rising “imps of fame” as Taine, Renan,
the Goncourts, Saint-Victor, Fromentin, Feuillet,—even such fair and
well-weighed, though antagonistic, examinations as that of Veuillot. In
regard to Taine and others, especially, Sainte-Beuve is particularly
interesting, because they present a crop of his seed, a development of
his own method, with the substitution, for that rather _ondoyant et
divers_ conclusion or no-conclusion of his to which we shall return, of
hard-and-fast theories of ruling ideas, and _milieux_, and the rest. All
this, however, would not make up to those of us who love the modern
_quâ_ modern little and the contemporary _quâ_ contemporary not at all,
if it had induced Sainte-Beuve to give up those inestimable studies of
the past, or those well-reasoned considerations of criticism in general,
which are his main titles to fame. But it did not. One of the very best
of the latter kind is the famous review of M. Taine’s own _Histoire de
la Littérature Anglaise_. And in the former, the “La Bruyère,” the
“Sévigné,” the “Perrault” in the first volume, the “Bossuet” in the
second, the article (independent of his “Introduction,” which is itself
a masterpiece) to Crepet’s _Poètes Français_, and the batch on the
_Mystère d’Orleans_ (that is to say, the Early French Drama) in the
third are more than reassuring. Soon, moreover, _Daphnis and Chloe_
promises a renewal[605] of those articles on the classics which are
perhaps the only ones ever written, since our regrettable
specialisations in the nineteenth century, by a literary critic of the
very first order in the modern sphere.[606]

Towards the last he turned a little too much to the political, and
though at the very end the long batch on Talleyrand is succeeded by one
equally long on his old favourite, Madame Desbordes-Valmore, the amiable
Marceline is not quite a poetess of importance enough, nor is the part
actually devoted to her poetry large enough, to make the swan-song quite
literary. But there is plenty of genuine matter everywhere, and even the
contemporary articles afford room for justice at last to Gautier, and
for a long and attractive review of _La Poesie en 1865_, where M. Sully
Prudhomme, and others not even yet quite out of fashion, appear. It may
be that something of the irrational and superstitious _guignon_ of
continuations attaches to these _Nouveaux Lundis_: but surely very
little.[607]

[Sidenote: _The conclusion of this matter._]

Why more? Indeed, save to observe the proportion and method of the book
(which are of the first importance), and to pay proper respect to a
prince in the critical Israel (which is hardly of less), why so much?
Except for the vast bulk of his work, and for the fact that it is not
collected into definite “Works,” but exists under a large number of
separate headings, some of which may be overlooked, Sainte-Beuve’s
criticism offers itself with almost every advantage and facility to the
reader. It has to the full those superficial attractions of
“readableness” which have given to French criticism its popular
position; and it lacks those superficialities in the other sense, which
detract from the value of French criticism so often. The immense variety
not merely provides something specially interesting for almost everybody
who has any literary, historical, or, one might almost say, intellectual
interests at all, but prevents tedium or satiety in those whose
interests are wider. The style, though neither coruscating, nor treacly,
nor enigmatic, is—in its perfection and when it has outgrown some early
defects—“the model of the middle style” in criticism, suitable for the
purpose and the writer’s temperament. It can say anything that the
author wishes to say, and does not try to say what he cannot.

But we must examine the results which he gives a little more closely
before concluding, and, according to the good old plan, take the
deficiencies, or the want of supremacies, first. As has been put, with
examples, above, Sainte-Beuve is not entirely to be trusted with the
out-of-the-way, the eccentric, even the abnormally great. The very
_ethos_ of the critic exposes him to this, and the opposite fault—the
_engouement_ for everything that _is_ out of the way, that _is_
eccentric, that _is_ abnormal, whether great or not—is not merely an
excess of a critical virtue, but a serious, an almost disqualifying
critical defect. Still, to be able to admire and recognise the
“earth-born and absolute fire”[608] is, if not a critical _sine qua
non_—for without it the critic may do good work—yet his rarest and
noblest gift. Sainte-Beuve had it not quite.

There is room for more difference of competent opinion as to his
abstinence from the most definite posing and placing—from the final
arrangement of his portraits exactly as he wished to have them seen by
his readers, and to stand in relation to each other. There is, of
course, its own merit in that abstinence, which is (as it was in the
earlier case of Villemain) something of a reaction from the fondness of
his “Empire” predecessors for the trenchant, the peremptory, the
official distinction and ticket. There had been very much too much of
this during the Neo-classic period; and there has been, to put it
mildly, quite enough and to spare of it since. Nevertheless, one may
think that Sainte-Beuve, though he never, as his countrymen too often
do, leaves you uninformed, does too often leave you floating—undecided
even as to what his own definite view of the man’s or work’s value,
relation, position, may be. Now this surely is a slight defect. When one
wants a picture, one does not want merely a sheet of drawing-paper, with
the most accurate and “genial” studies of eye, nose, chin, mouth, hair,
scattered anyhow about it, but the complete, or at any rate the
outlined, face made up from these studies.

I can think of no general fault save these two, and we are not now to
hark back to particulars. The tale of general and particular excellences
is more agreeable to construct, but more difficult to put in little. The
head and front of Sainte-Beuve’s critical welldoing he has himself put
excellently and more than once. To read; to understand; to love:—and
then to facilitate reading, understanding, and loving on the part of
others—these are the first and second great commandments of the critic.
And few, surely, have obeyed them better. He may be a little cumbered
about much serving—we do not (that is those of us who want criticism)
always want such Persic apparatus of biography and history and gossip.
But the Persic apparatus is very agreeable in itself, and sometimes even
not useless. And there is plenty of the plain leg of critical mutton—
well fed, well killed, well kept, and well dressed. Only perhaps a
certain degree of expertness can fully appreciate, but ordinary sense
and taste must surely not fail to perceive, the range of reading which
is—be it again and again repeated—in all but the most extraordinary
cases the _necessarium_, if not the _unum necessarium_, of the critic.
Common-sense and taste are perhaps at least equally well prepared with
the expertest _expertise_ to recognise, if they are given their way, the
sanity and the equity, the patience and the thoroughness, the freedom
from crotchet and caprice, from the merely parochial and the merely
particularist, which distinguish Sainte-Beuve from almost all other
critics. He was, as we have seen, very lucky; few have had at once his
gifts, and his opportunities of exercising them, and that rarest and
happiest gift of “the Hour,” without which Gift, and even in some sense
Opportunity, will fail to estate a man in his proper place. But the Hour
has seldom found the Man so ready: and the Man has in no single instance
in our department, and in few throughout all, requited the Hour by
leaving such fruits of it for all time to come.

The general discussion of the Classic-Romantic quarrel—so far as we can
deal with it—will be for the Interchapters; and it is not even very easy
here to make a methodic distinction between the names who will best
appear in this chronicle side by side with Sainte-Beuve, and those who
should figure in the corresponding chapter of the next Book as his
successors. But applying something of the same method which has helped
us before, we may perhaps most conveniently group beside him Victor Hugo
as a matter of course, with, of the rest, five representative figures—
Gautier for the Romantic farthest, the out-and-out partisans of
“art-for-art”; Nisard for the Classical reaction; Saint-Marc Girardin as
an example of that Academic criticism which has always been so important
in France, and which with and after Villemain took a new colour;
Planche, as the most noteworthy champion of the other school (yet not so
“other” but that the two interpenetrate and overlap) of the critics who
are purely men of letters, and almost purely journalists; and Magnin for
the pure scholars. The rest, with one or two exceptions, but not
excepting so famous a man as Janin, will bear postponement, can even be
postponed with advantage. The chief exception is Mérimée; here, as
always, by the joint efforts of Fate and himself, alone. But the great
twin names of Michelet and Quinet may require a little mention here, and
before proceeding even to Hugo.

[Sidenote: _Michelet and Quinet._]

These two inseparables—more inseparable even than the other pair, Cousin
and Villemain—must, I fear, be also among those whom I shall seem to
some readers to slight. Both, but especially Quinet,[609] were of course
saturated with literature. From his first translation of Herder to his
posthumous work on the Greek genius, Quinet was always dealing with the
subject, often _nominatim_, seldom in very remote fashion. Michelet no
doubt directed himself more to the purely historical side of that
historical study of humanity which he learnt from Vico, and Quinet
probably from Herder himself. Literary citations, literary parallels,
literary suggestions swarm in Michelet; even the ’45 seems to him (the
origin of the notion is obvious enough, but thinking it out will be
found uncommonly difficult) “a Canto of _Ossian_.” But for our purposes
the pair are almost disqualified—Michelet more than Quinet, but Quinet
very mainly—by two things. The first is that confusion—whither derived
from Vico or from the Germans does not matter—of literature with
history, sociology, politics, psychology, and the like, which has seemed
orthodox to the two last generations, but which to me appears a
dangerous delusion and confusion. The other is the peculiar _voyant_
thought and style of both, which precludes them from taking anything
like a clear and achromatic view of any literary matter, even if they
had endeavoured to do so. Not that the prophet cannot be a critic, for
we have been able to disentangle some extremely clear, trenchant, and
(however disputable) orderly and logical dicta of criticism from Blake:
and Carlyle’s deficiencies, where he is deficient as a critic, do not at
all come from this cause. But maresnesting, and night-maresnesting in
special, is the very worst possible—perhaps one might say the very most
impossible—occupation for a critic; and while Quinet was often, Michelet
was almost always, in quest of the variety and the sub-variety of nest.

[Sidenote: _Hugo._]

The temperament of Victor Hugo[610] was perhaps as uncritical a one as
any man ever possessed, or as ever possessed any man: but the strength
of his genius was such that it could hardly fail to confer mastery, at
any rate for a time, on its various literary applications. When the sins
of temperament had become besetting and habitual, and the genius was—in
this respect, not others—a little failed, his criticism became scarcely
more than a curiosity; when the genius was still in its prime, and the
temperament had not broken through all control, it is sometimes of a
very notable character. _William Shakespeare_[611] is the best text-book
of the later and worse state; the _Prefaces_ to the _Cromwell_,[612] to
the _Orientales_,[613] and the _Littérature et Philosophie Mêlées_[614]
of the earlier and better. To take the worst first, though there are
fine things in the _Shakespeare_ book,—there could not fail to be,
seeing that it was written, _en regardant l’océan_, by Victor Hugo,—and
though a sort of _aura_ of the right Romantic fury still breathes
through it, it has nothing of criticism except a splendid concionatory
harangue to admiration of the best things, and a great deal of Hugonism
nearly at its worst. The colossal confidence in ignorance, which made
the poet a laughing-stock to his enemies, permits him to observe (in
arguing that England never knew her Shakespeare till Voltaire taught her
better) that Dryden _parla de S. une fois pour le déclarer hors
d’usage_. [Sidenote: William Shakespeare.] It would be a good
examination question, “Translate into the French of Hugo ‘the largest
and most universal soul,’ &c.,” and the dictionary resulting would be
quite a useful cipher-code. Elsewhere you have the usual page-long
strings of names, the usual staccato sentences, punctuated with _nons_
and _ouis_, and stripped of articles and particles, the usual abuse of
England (whose life for one thing that she did, in giving Victor Hugo
refuge, he will yet not wholly take), and also the usual bursts of
verbal and imaginative inspiration which give us the _petite fièvre
cérébrale_, and make us excuse, forget, welcome any nonsense, any bad
taste, even any bad blood.

[Sidenote: Littérature et Philosophie.]

Nothing that I have said, or shall say, is to be construed as implying
contempt of the remaining critical works of Hugo. On the contrary, “Read
all the Prefaces of _Dryden_,” which Swift said in scorn, may be adapted
here in utter seriousness. And the student who wishes to know must read
the whole of _Littérature et Philosophie Mêlées_—that curious collection
of the poet’s critical and other work from the age of seventeen to the
age of thirty-two. The gods do not grant to any man to be a good critic
at seventeen; but they do grant to a Victor Hugo not to be a negligible
writer at any time. In the “Journal of a Young Jacobite” of 1819; in the
“Opinions of a Revolutionary” of 1830; in the _Idées au Hasard_; above
all, when the poet-critic was a little over age, in the articles on
Scott and Voltaire, on Lamennais and Byron, on Mirabeau and Dovalle,
there is matter which might have made twenty critics; though it did not
please the Fates that it should actually make one. These things are a
very open allegory; there should not be any need, and there is certainly
here no space, to interpret them.[615]

[Sidenote: _The_ Cromwell _Preface,_]

If Victor Hugo had written no criticism but _William Shakespeare_, I
think I should have put him, as I have put Balzac, in a note, and left
him otherwise alone, out of respect, not of persons, but of the divinity
of poetry. The two Prefaces that I have selected—there are others, but
these will suffice us—would have given him a substantive place here, if
he had written no poetry at all. That to _Cromwell_ is the longer, the
more elaborate, and much the more famous: but I do not think that it is
really quite so important as the later and shorter to the _Orientales_.
In the first, with a proud humility which retains a little more of the
noun, if it has not much less of the adjective, than the undisguised
arrogance of the later work, Hugo, while professing not to defend
himself at all, and to regard the Classic _v._ Romantic debate as
practically fought out and over, as a fact fights the whole battle once
more. It is observable that the word “art,” without being made exactly
the battle-cry, recurs again and again throughout the piece, and is, in
fact, its dominant. But he has a theory of poetry, not so very different
in outline from that of the “Goliaths classiques,” of whom he affects
not so much as to take notice. Man and poetry woke in primitive times;
when man is singing he is close to God; and the rest of it. The voice is
unmistakably Hugo’s, but the forms of thought which it chooses might
almost be eighteenth, or even seventeenth, century. They work out the
conclusion that Epic + Lyric = Drama—the latter being largely dealt with
to show the rise of Comedy and the dignity of the Grotesque. Already we
get Hugo’s name-triads flung at us (to use one of his beloved Spanish
comparisons) like _bolas_. There is a great deal about Shakespeare. The
“Two” Unities—Hugo has extended his grace to the original one—of Time
and Place are too absurd to be spoken of: but they _are_ spoken of and
shown to be absurd. A passage on rules, models, and imitations is
perhaps the most effective of the whole, though it comes the best part
of a century after Lessing. There is an excommunication of Delille (very
interesting to compare with the glorification by Joubert, whose own
theory of poetry fits Hugo as well, as it fits Delille, _to us_,
strangely), leading to some remarks on _Cromwell_ itself, which have but
minor interest, and a notable conclusion on Criticism. There is here
more dignity than in those remarks in which he was wont to indulge
later, when he drew upon himself the dignified reproof of M. Nisard: and
they contain some really good observation on False Taste, old and new, a
well-founded denunciation of critique by rule and kind, by faults and
beauties, and a final protest against mere Authority.

The piece is of great interest even now: and one can readily understand
the immense influence it must have had as a manifesto. But it is injured
by its length, by its want of method, and by the constant presence of
the two dissonances above indicated. That the poet should fight _pro
domo sua_ is natural, desirable, laudable: but why are we to be
disturbed by the constant assertion of a lofty indifference? It is again
natural, desirable, laudable, that he should fight the general Romantic
prize—there was every possible justification for it. But why, again, the
pretence of not troubling himself about any such business, and of the
business being really over?

[Sidenote: _and that to the_ Orientales.]

The Preface to the _Orientales_ escapes all these objections and, short
as it is, is undoubtedly the most remarkable piece of criticism that
Hugo has left, while it is also the boldest, the clearest, the least
hampered with tricks and mannerisms, the most serious, the most really
dignified. In it he “goes straight for the jugular.”[616] He questions,
and denies point-blank, the right of the critic to interrogate the poet
on his choice of subject or of treatment _at all_. “L’ouvrage est-il bon
ou est-il mauvais: voilà tout le domaine de la critique.” Here we come
again to one of the epoch-making sentences, one of the great _jalons_ of
critical history. No ancient had ever dared to say it. Patrizzi had said
it, hardly knowing what he had said. The German and English Romantics
had cast about it, implied it, made themselves responsible for it, or
something like it; but never posed it plumply as the Charter of
Literature. And Hugo does not leave it as if he were afraid of it, or
half-ignorant what it means. He turns it over and over, so as at each
turn to give a fresh blow to the Neo-classics. Never mind the means
employed: ask _how_ they are employed. There are no good or bad subjects
in poetry: there are only good or bad poets. Everything is a subject.
Poetry is a country of universal suffrage: examine _how_ the artist has
worked, not _why_. Art has nothing to do with gags, leading-strings,
handcuffs: he may go where he list, believe as he list, do what he
lists. Kind, story, space, time, fashion, all are at his choice.

And then, amplifying more particularly the phrase about the _limits_ of
art, Hugo has one of his most characteristic and finest passages of
exuberant prose, expressing the wish to make his poetry like a Spanish
city—half oriental, half mediæval—and finishes very briefly with some
words on his actual book.

[Sidenote: _Capital position of this latter._]

This is the real _clou_, the central decisive point of Hugonic, and
indeed of all Romantic, criticism. “Never mind the subject, the kind,
anything of that sort: is the treatment good?” is practically the gospel
of modern as opposed to ancient, of Romantic as opposed to Classical,
criticism. Of course, like all hard-and-fast propositions and
prescriptions as to things that are not hard-and-fast, and especially
like all controversial propositions and aggressive prescriptions of all
kinds, it does not contain the whole truth, and it does not even contain
nothing but the truth. If it be construed in the sense that one subject
is as good as another, it may, and probably will, lead wrong. If it be
taken to mean that even the experience of our two thousand five hundred
years (or whatever it is) of literature does not show that some subjects
are so much more difficult and thankless than others that they are
_practically_ impossible, it will entice the poet to useless and
probably dangerous experiment. But then, with reasonable people, it does
not mean either of these things. It is in reality a defensive much more
than an offensive proposition,—a protest which must be allowed in any
Court of Historical Criticism against the Classic and especially the
Neo-classic notion of _a priori_ classification of Subject and Kind, and
of referring to this instead of considering _the work_ first. [Sidenote:
_The_ “work”.]I have known objection taken to the use—at least the
frequent use—of this word “work” in literature, and as to literature. It
is, in fact, something of a shibboleth: but, I think, a valuable one. No
one who uses it intelligently is likely to forget that it is the _work_,
the work_ing_, the art, not the material, that he is to look to first.
And Victor Hugo, in the document before us, was practically the first to
enjoin this duty with authority and conviction.

We may pass appropriately to his most distinguished opponent and his
most enthusiastic disciple in regard to this gospel.

[Sidenote: _Nisard: his_ Ægri Somnia.]

The memories of a reviewer, however hard he may have tried to do his
duty, are apt to lodge in a tomb from which there grow more briers than
roses. It is not the most unpleasant of the thoughts of the present
writer on his own reviewing period that the _Ægri Somnia_[617] of M.
Désiré Nisard enabled him, not quite too late, to revise, in the right
direction, his opinion of their author. There needed, and there needs,
no grovelling palinode—Nisard still seemed, and still seems to me, to
have taken on the whole the wrong side in criticism. And I am not quite
certain that the reproach (which was brought against him and which he
endeavoured to refute, almost as late as the publication of _Ægri
Somnia_ itself, by boldly and wisely reprinting his early articles) of
having “burnt what he had adored” was quite unjust. But in these last
utterances there was a singular dignity, justice, and good taste,
contrasting rather fortunately or unfortunately, according to the side
on which one looked, with the insolences which Hugo had permitted
himself during the senile apotheosis of his fifteen years’ restoration
after the Année Terrible. And one saw—as indeed one always had seen more
or less—that whatever had been faulty in M. Nisard’s earlier, but not
earliest judgments, had been the result of an undue, an exclusive, a not
quite intelligently catholic devotion to justice, dignity, good taste.
There have been greater men who had worse gods.

[Sidenote: _His_ Essais sur le Romantisme.]

If one did not know how very differently personal matters strike the
person and the not-person, it might be surprising to a reader of the
reprinted _Essais sur le Romantisme_[618] that M. Nisard should have in
any way complained of the charge of burning what he had adored. The
first half of the book is occupied with articles dating from 1829 to
1831—on Hugo, Vigny, Sainte-Beuve, Lamartine, and even Musset. They are
very good articles; they are, I think, better criticism than
Sainte-Beuve’s own was at this time: but, though they are not wildly
ultra-Romantic, they in each and every case—even in that of Musset
himself—take the side and the defence of the innovators. It is true that
there is, towards the last, a momentous and germinal doubt whether there
is not something _excessive_ in Hugo—whether there is not _de trop_.

And in the Preface to the second part, written in 1838, the critic
announces his conversion in terms which admit of no dispute. He speaks
of his _retour aux doctrines classiques_, he says that he has “ranged
himself,” that he “climbs back, with discouraged and dragging step, the
road that he had run down in his intoxication.” Metaphor for metaphor,
has this much change to give or to receive from that of “burning the
adored”? And the substance of the remainder bears this out. Much in the
manifesto _Contre la Littérature Facile_ is quite true—not merely of
1830: and the subsequent controversy with Jules Janin is not idle or
one-sided. But as for the articles on Hugo himself which follow, an
innocent person might suppose them to have been written by quite another
M. Nisard than the author of those above referred to. The _Chants du
Crépuscule_, we are told, “ont achevé de désespérer les amis de M. V.
H.” (They contain, let it be remembered, _Napoleon II_.) There is a
_caractère de décadence_ in them. His prose has a better chance than his
verse. His _mort littéraire_ is _prochaine_ (so near, in fact, that he
wrote the _Légende des Siècles_ twenty, and published the _Quatre Vents
de l’Esprit_ more than forty years later).

Yes! M. Nisard was burning what he had adored; but it is fair to admit
that for the rest of his long life he adored what he had certainly never
burned. His most famous work, the _Histoire de la Littérature
Française_,[619] is written in rigid confinement to the Classical house,
with fresh windows opened, indeed, so that the critic could see the
glory of Shakespeare and others outside, but with a strict regulation
that nothing shall be changed in the furniture and regulations within.
The capital studies of Latin Poets, the miscellaneous literary work—
professorial and other—are all the consistent utterances of a man who
has pulled himself up on the edge (or a little over the edge) of a
precipice, and has resolved, for the rest of his life, to walk steadily
in the other direction. No article of Sainte-Beuve’s is at once juster
and more acute than that on M. Nisard’s _History_, with its exposition
of the way in which the critic-historian has constructed an _a priori_
theory of the French literary genius, and has written his history
accordingly—accepting and eulogising those writers who illustrate his
conception, neglecting or denouncing those who run counter to it. And
the conception itself is formed altogether according to the second
manner of viewing—the view according to which _Les Chants du Crépuscule_
is, in another sense, a song of approaching night. M. Nisard tells us
that his conversion was effected during a visit to England, and under
the influence of Homer and La Fontaine. Surely never was there such a
singular instance of _similia similibus_ in literature; nor has the
country of Shakespeare—where, by the way, Tennyson and Browning had just
brought out their first books—ever exercised a more remarkable influence
upon a studious visitor.

By whatever process, M. Nisard had become a confirmed anti-Romantic, and
such he remained to the end. He is one of the best of the breed:
learned, consistent, courageous, courteous withal, as the critic who is
or wishes to be considered “scholarly” too seldom is. But he has given
himself up to an idol: he will not take the Work as the Work presents
itself, and judge whether it is good or bad. And the result is
inevitable.

[Sidenote: _Their_ culpa maxima.]

The conclusion of the reprinted _Essais_, with great temper and in
excellent taste, practically confesses M. Nisard’s weakness as a critic.
It is the weakness of the old “faults-and-beauties” method, joined to
the moral heresy. Victor Hugo, he says, was a man with very grave moral
faults. He was: and what is more, these moral faults were of a
singularly disenchanting kind. Further, Victor Hugo’s works are full of
faults not merely moral. They are: and sometimes these faults are almost
inconceivable. But what M. Nisard forgot is that the critic, like the
miner, is finally concerned with the quantity and quality of poetic gold
which a poet—or, for the matter of that, with the quantity and quality
of literary gold which any man of letters—will yield. No matter that it
lies in a pestilential neighbourhood; no matter that you have to smelt
out quartz, and far worse and uglier things than quartz, to get it. Is
the gold there? That, and nothing else, is the question. Now, in Hugo
the gold is there; it is there not by pennyweights, not by ounces, not
by pounds, but by hundredweights to the ton. And the critical process,
if only it be perfected, is after all not so laborious as the process of
stamps and cyanide; the critic himself is not susceptible to wild beasts
and malaria. Gold or no gold? much gold or little? these are his true
questions. M. Nisard could not see them. The gold must be ready smelted
to a certain orthodox French standard; it must be even brought in
ingots, or ready worked into jewellery, according to pattern. Otherwise
he would not have it. And of the many critics that have been, are, will
be, like unto him, he was after all one of the best.

[Sidenote: _Gautier._]

France—I have been told frequently of late, and even not so very late,
years—has forgotten her Théophile Gautier. And some of the voices have
generally said that she has been quite right in doing so, whether urged
to the forgetfulness by serious arguments such as those of M. Émile
Faguet (whom, though I differ with him not seldom, I desire to take the
opportunity here of saluting with all possible respect as an admirable
critic, and to whom I could almost pay the doubtful compliment of
wishing that he were dead in order that I might discuss him fully), or
by the mere impertinences of quite trivial folk. I have never seen the
least reason to change my own opinion to the contrary, that “Théo” was
not only one of the most amiable and (with some peccadillos) estimable
men of letters of the whole French century, but one of the greatest of
its men of letters in verse and in prose, in romance and in
travel-writing, in miscellanies and in criticism. He was not greatest in
the function which here concerns us, but he was great. The common
complaint that he was too good-natured, though it may have some faint
colour, is mainly a blunder and the son of a blunder—that is to say, of
the notion, far too often encouraged by critics themselves, that the
critic is a schoolmaster, whose business is to say nothing but
“Blockhead!” and “Sit down!” and “Come to me after school!” But the
comparative ill-luck which pursued him, and forced him always to write
for bread, partly turned him away from pure literary criticism,[620] and
sometimes made him write smooth but not very significant things to
please, though never at the cost of friendship and principle. Much that
he wrote is not reprinted; he could not afford, like M. de Pontmartin,
for instance, to “embook” all his _feuilletons_. Yet certain volumes of
his printed works, the _Grotesques_, the _Histoire du Romantisme_, and
its companion the _Portraits Contemporains_, with some separate
articles, prefaces, &c., will give us good matter to indite of.[621]

[Sidenote: _His theory: “Art for Art’s sake,” &c._]

“Théo” has not been a favourite with the grave and precise sort among
our fellowship as a rule: yet, if they could be consistent, they should
at least admire him for his own consistency, and for the fact that, from
the very first to the very last, his criticism, apparently so
impressionist and occasional, was conducted on an almost rigid—on a
quite logical and well co-ordinated—theory. This theory was the famous
one of “L’Art pour l’Art,” with, for inseparable companion, the doctrine
that _the_ instrument, _the_ medium, _the_ vehicle, almost _the_
constituent of literary art, is the Word, the beautiful word, furnished
with its beauty by light and colour, by sound and form, and developing
it by skilful and laborious arrangement, selection, and rejection. As
for the major theory (the formulation of which is sometimes attributed
to Hugo himself, and was admitted by him as late as _William
Shakespeare_, but with an important qualification, and even, to a
certain extent, disclaimer, as to its range and meaning) I have already
said,[622] though I see that some critics have not observed the
observation, that, especially with the addition “Art for Art’s sake
_only_,” it is at best but a half truth, and may be a full half “error
and curse.” And we all know to what sort of whole a half truth
constantly turns. Art, after all, is a _means_: and “means for means’
sake only,” if not nonsense, is at any rate sense very incomplete. But
it was necessary, and it was almost desirable, that the exaggeration
should be formulated, because of the incessant intrusion of the opposite
theories, which are scarcely even _quarter_-truths, that all depends on
the subject, that art must serve morality, and the like. As for the
second doctrine above formulated, I need not say that, with Longinus and
with Dante, I accept it absolutely and _sans phrase_. To both doctrines,
however, to the more disputable as to the less, Gautier flew at first,
and clung at last, not more in the provocative youthfulness of the
Preface to _Mademoiselle de Maupin_ than in the famous and exquisite

                     “Oui, l'œuvre sort plus belle”

of _Émaux et Camées_, many years afterwards, or in conversation and
writing, more than as many years later still. The first is an eager and
passionate sermon on the doctrine by a fervent neophyte; the second, its
mature embodiment in imperishable verse by a master. Both together leave
very little to be said on the matter save the single word “Read!”

[Sidenote: _His practice_: Les Grotesques.]

At any rate, what has to be said on them by way of comment belongs
rather to Interchapter and Conclusion than to this place, where we are
busy with Gautier’s application of his doctrines. The next considerable
document to the Preface just noticed is the _Grotesques_ of 1844, a
delightful book. After all that has been written since on Villon, one
comes back to it about him. Scalion de Virbluneau and some others are
mere _hors-d'œuvre_, agreeable enough, but no more. The _pièce de
résistance_ of the book is the long, ardent, but at the same time
humorous (Théo was one of the few indubitable humourists that France can
boast) vindication of the critic’s namesake, Théophile de Viaud, one of
the most luckless of the many luckless poets of genius. But Saint-Amant,
Chapelain, Scudéry, Scarron, supply him with occasions for work scarcely
inferior to the “Théophile.” The criticism is of course, on the whole,
avowedly criticism of the lighter kind, gossip-criticism, criticism
intended not to disgust those who do not take literature very seriously.
But it is also intended to please those who do: and it does.

[Sidenote: Histoire du Romantisme, _&c._]

The various documents included under the general head of _Histoire du
Romantisme_ and _Portraits Contemporains_ are of very different dates,
covering nearly the whole of Gautier’s forty years of literary life.
Being ranged rather by subject than by date,[623] they enable us to
judge the singular evenness and continuity of his critical spirit, which
(as Maxime Du Camp, I think, has urged, and as I myself have always
held) was systematic by tendency and nature, though haphazard on the
surface. The _Histoire_ itself was actually interrupted by the
critic-poet’s death: and the masterly Essay on the French Poetry of the
middle of the Century (which should be compared with Sainte-Beuve’s) is
only five years before it: but some of its companions go back twenty
years, and many of the _Portraits Contemporains_ recede to the legendary
decade of the ’Thirties themselves.

[Sidenote: _Ubiquity of felicity in his criticism._]

In all, the same critical qualities are apparent—a central motive and
directing power of belief in the two doctrines stated above, but at the
same time a system of gearing, flexible enough to accommodate itself to
the most widely different subjects, an unwearied and rejoicing faculty
of appreciation proper, an unrivalled science of verse and of
descriptive and decorative prose, an ever-present charm, and, over all
and through all, the atmosphere of the sweet and sunny temper which it
is so specially delightful and so rare to find in a competent critic.
But for those who want sufficient yet not too copious examples, three
long pieces—the article on French Poetry above mentioned, the “Balzac”
of 1858 (which M. Montégut, I think, has justly called _magnifique_),
and the Introduction to the posthumous edition of Baudelaire in 1867—
will do excellently. Between them they would fill a not so very small
volume, and there would be hardly a page in that volume destitute of the
merits just enumerated, and others to boot. The first is perhaps the
greatest example extant of reviewing, brought _sub specie æternitatis_,
and made really higher criticism. From the _Légende des Siècles_ (and
remember what Gautier writing on Hugo meant under the Second Empire!) to
the _Odes Funambulesques_, from _Poèmes Evangéliques_ to _Fleurs du
Mal_, on scores of poets and books of poetry besides, he finds always
the suitable, and, at the same time, always the admirable word to say.
On Balzac and Baudelaire alike—great as is the alteration of palette,
and viewing-glass, and style of handling that the two require—he shows
alike that “impeccability,” that “perfect magic in letters,” which the
younger of his subjects had ascribed to him. I do not know any critic
who deserves the older and now strangely altered epithet of “candid”
(_i.e._, “_amiably_ just”) better than Gautier: but his amiability is
never indulged at the expense of his justice. And perhaps it needs
nothing more than the statement of this fact to express, συνετοῖσι, the
infinite resources of his skill in thought and phrase.

[Sidenote: _Saint-Marc Giradin._]

Saint-Marc Girardin[624] (who was three or four years older than
Sainte-Beuve, and outlived him by four or five) has, in a reference
above, been coupled with Villemain, and the resemblance both of career
and of critical quality is rather strong. Both were politicians, both
professors, and both played their double part after a fashion to which
there are few parallels in English history, and those few not very
encouraging. But Saint-Marc Girardin was a really considerable person in
politics—not least in the very last days of his life, when, in the
National Assembly, charged with the reconstitution of France after the
Prussian War, he was a strong monarchical and Orleanist partisan. Of his
numerous works, our chief texts are his _Cours de Littérature
Dramatique_ and his _Essais de Littérature et de Morale_ which appeared
in succession[625] about the middle of the fifth decade of the
nineteenth century. It may be well to say frankly and plumply that he is
one of our (or perhaps it were better not to avoid the _moi haïssable_,
and say “my”) disappointments. I did not read him very early, and had a
very fair conceit of him when I began: but I find little to recommend in
him.[626] He is emphatically “clever”; must have been a stimulating and
effectual professor; writes very well; has a real (and not, as is rather
common, a painfully simulated) combination of the man of letters and the
man of the world. But he does not give me the idea of having had any
spontaneous, individual, love for literature, or any original personal
views about it. He has everywhere the _juste milieu_, the opportunism of
his time, and his party, and his profession. He is neither a _perruque_
nor an _échevelé_: he is, in fact, an accomplished Angel of the Church
of the Laodiceans. And Time is terribly of the Divine mind as to
Laodicea and its angels.

Moreover, his method of dealing with Literature, and especially with
that dramatic literature which chiefly interested him, is of the kind
from which, as it seems to me, there come few good things—“De l’Amour
Conjugal chez Shakespeare,” “Le Mariage au Théâtre dans Molière,” “La
Jalousie” in this, that, and the other. It may be because of that
“barrenness in the philosophic” with which I have been charged; but
these things seem to me to be learning’s labour lost. Study Othello,
study Leontes, study Posthumus as much as you like; but to see the life,
the poetry, the passion in these live, poetic, passionate men and plays,
not to extract a dead essence in a bottle and label it “Jealousy in
Shakespeare”—or rather _in vacuo_. Still, there are others who have
other tastes, and Saint-Marc Girardin’s half score of editions prove it,
and perhaps justify them.

[Sidenote: _Planche._]

Gustave Planche, on the other hand—a critic probably much less known
now, except vaguely and anecdotically, than Girardin—appears to me to
have been a real critic, and to have missed, so narrowly that I do not
quite know _how_ he missed it, being a very great critic. Probably it
was _quia non multum amabat_: because he succumbed to that fatalest
temptation of our kind to scratch and scoff and snarl instead of
embracing. Anecdotically, as I have said, he is probably well enough
known—his passion for George Sand, and his odd ways, and especially that
most unlucky indifference to clean linen, and cleanliness generally,
which he shared with the authors of the _Song to David_ and the
_Rambler_, turn up in all the books. He appears in the _Comédie
Humaine_,[627] and the more extreme Hugolaters shudder or storm at him
as a blasphemer of Hugo. But I rather doubt whether many people read his
criticism now.[628]

[Sidenote: _Weight of his criticism._]

Yet it deserves reading thoroughly: and it is only a pity that there is
not more of it easily accessible. That Planche entirely avoids the quest
of the mare’s-nest cannot be said; but some varieties of that curious
structure are very tempting even to good critics. He may be thought to
have found or built a famous one in the discovery that the three
egregious books of the excellent Henry Mackenzie, instead of being
Sterne _plus_ Rousseau, watered down with _quant. suff._ of artificial
tears, are “a sorrowful and unique hymn on the insufficiency and
obscurity of actual life,” the “confession of an immaculate soul.” One
thinks of the entire pressgang lifting up its voice and weeping at the
noble conduct of old Edwards, and the like, and one marvels—but not, in
my case at least, contemptuously. It is perhaps not wonderful, after
this, that Planche, though he admires Fielding, cannot tolerate
_Jonathan Wild_. Yet in close context he gives us taste of his quality
by a really admirable inquiry—one of the best I know—into the difference
of Drama and Novel, and the light which is thrown by and on this
difference, in regard to the inferiority of Fielding as a dramatist, and
his greatness in prose fiction. No one who has been so kind as to
interest himself in my views will think that I agree with Planche when
he holds that “literary quality does not matter,” when he bids us seek
“the will before the inspiration, the fatal irresistible _idea_.” He
would certainly have anathematised, and does, I think, somewhere very
nearly anathematise in terms, my favourite doctrine of the Poetic
Moment. But what do such differences of opinion matter? You blaze away
at the enemy, but, if he and you be of the right stamp, you salute the
soldier.

And Planche (for all his most unfortunate objection to soap and water)
is, I think, a “gentleman of the French Guard,” a _Black Mousquetaire_
of the doughtiest. His objection to Hugo[629] is not in the least fossil
or stupid. He has a right to it: it is a legitimate and inevitable
deduction from his general poetic creed and likings. No poet gives more
“poetic moments” than Hugo: and Planche, as we have seen, does not hold
with them. No poet has more of _poésie visible_ than Hugo: and Planche
objects to this poetry _nominatim_, directly, again and again, and wants
to go back to that _poésie intelligible_, in which, it must be admitted,
Victor would not be quite so victorious. He argues—and I do not know
that one can so easily deny it off-hand as point out that it is a
dangerous suggestion of false issues—that beauty of form does sometimes
“appeal to the very lowest passions”: while, on the other hand, a poet
_doit toujours avoir une idée philosophique_, which (again we must
confess) Hugo very seldom, if ever, had. Yet for all this he can say
plumply, _pour le maniement de la langue, M. Hugo n’a pas de rival_, and
he admires, little as he can have agreed with much of it, that
remarkable Preface to _Littérature et Philosophie Mélées_ on which we
have commented above.

He is nothing if not a daring critic. Some of us, who have studied
French Literature very long, would hesitate to tell a Frenchman, as
Planche unhesitatingly tells Bulwer,[630] not merely that he ought to be
_plus serré, plus précis, et moins vague_, which is true and within any
one’s competence, but _moins incorrect_, which from a foreigner seems
going far. This _verbality_ of Planche’s is in fact one of his main
notes. Lamartine,[631] one might think, was made for him as a poet: and
he does indeed think that Lamartine’s position is _magnifique et
incontesté_. But he does not scruple to say that _la grammaire est
souvent offensée_ by the poet of the _Méditations_; that _l’indicatif se
croise avec l’imparfait_ (think of the horror of this crime!) _à trois
lignes de distance_; that the ambitious _Jocelyn_ is _un beau poème sans
composition et sans style_. It may be more surprising that he is not
cordial to Alfred de Vigny, and cannot in the least grasp _Dolorida_:
but it must be remembered that Vigny’s earlier work (the posthumous
Poems might have pleased Planche better, had he lived to see them) is
distinctly inclined to that _poésie visible_, which the critic did not
like because, I think, he could not himself “see” it. It must be
admitted that he “gets home” on Leconte de Lisle’s Wardour Street Greek—
though I do not know that his sharp correction is more fatal than
“Théo’s” mild one.[632]

Lastly, we may mention the extremely remarkable paper[633] on _Les
Royautés Littéraires_, with its notable classification of critics into
those who gauge works of literature (1) by comparing them with the past,
(2) as present things merely, (3) by looking to the future and the end
that the author proposes to himself. Here it is enough to point out to
the intelligent the curious difference between this classification and
some others. For Planche, near as his terms may seem to come to it, does
_not_ mean, by the criticism of his first class, what we mean by the
Historic-Comparative method.

These specimens will, I hope, for all their scrappiness and want of
context, give some idea of the force, weight, acuteness, and
intellectual moment of Planche’s criticism. It is not in merely
accidental and catalogue fashion that I have put him next to Saint-Marc
Girardin. There is a real and a vital contrast. Planche may be right or
he may be wrong, but what he says is coherent; it comes from a direct
and real examination, intensely interested, of the subject under
discussion; it is guided by and supplemented from a body of definite
and, to some extent at any rate, reasoned literary preferences and
principles. In short, once more, the live contact, the true, fruitful,
critical embrace. It is a pity he did not wash!

[Sidenote: _Magnin._]

Of Magnin we need not say so much, but all that is said must be good. A
librarian for many, and a professor for a few, years, he was, as we have
called him, a pure scholar, but with his erudition mellowed and
sweetened by literature. His _Origines du Théâtre en Europe_,[634]
written in the early days of historical comparative study of mediæval
literature, is a classic still: and his _Causeries et Méditations_[635]
contain many things worth reading. He was much interested, as were so
many Frenchmen, by the visit of the English company of actors, in which
Miss Smithson was leading lady, to Paris: and he was led to study the
older English theatre, though he misjudges _A New Way to Pay Old Debts_,
and rather staggers one’s notion of the necessary acquaintance with the
language of the literature you are criticising, by talking about an
English poem entitled “_The_ Greece” (not “_La Grèce_,” understand). But
probably we all do things as bad or worse. And at any rate, Magnin, with
this work, his _Origines_, the re-introduction of modern readers to
Hroswitha,[636] and other things, is a protagonist of the historical and
the comparative in the study of literature.

[Sidenote: _Mérimée._]

As we separated Beyle in a former chapter, so we may separate Beyle’s
“most remarkable production,” Mérimée,[637] in this. His temperament,
the very opposite in all ways to Hugo’s, was as critical as Hugo’s was
uncritical, and his exquisite style—in some respects the most exquisite
of the French nineteenth century—should have lent itself to criticism
with a sort of pre-established harmony that could never have belonged to
the merely plain, or to the mainly “fulgurous.” But, as in other ways,
there was something suicidal, or at least self-silencing, in this same
temperament, and Mérimée has not left us very much to deal with here.
There are numerous strokes of it in the _Letters_ to Panizzi and the
_Inconnues_, some of them not unprecious. We knew that Mérimée (ii. 205,
to _the_ Inconnue) would think Hugo “words without ideas,” and recommend
a dose of Madame de Sévigné as a remedy (why not enjoy both and turn
them to profit?). But it is really interesting to find that he cannot
like Baudelaire, and most of all to find his first (though even then
rather lukewarm) approval of Renan as a brother in freethought
lessening, till we have the famous description—worthy of a Veuillot who
should cease to be a swashbuckler and become a gentleman of the sword—of
the style of the _Vie de Jésus_ as “the delight of all the servant-girls
of France.” But Mérimée, like some others whom we have noticed, was
drawn away by his studies, no less than by those contradictions of
cynical-sentimental temperament of which we have spoken, from pure
literary criticism to things like History and Antiquities, where he had
not to “distrust himself.” There may even have been some of the
Congrevian affectation, which Voltaire not unjustly rebuked, in the
caprice which made him, as M. Blaze de Bury[638] says, “causeur, érudit,
archéologue, académicien, sénateur, tout ce qu’on voulait, mais homme de
lettres! jamais!” which brought it about that “avec lui la littérature
ne venait que par surcroît.” In his published things of the kind,
_Mélanges Historiques et Littéraires_,[639] _Portraits Historiques et
Littéraires_,[640] and the like, the literary side is studiously kept
down and away from, though, as we see from the _Letters_, it was always
really present. He imputes to Beyle[641] his own assumed detachment from
it; the review[642] of Ticknor’s _Spanish Literature_, which he was so
admirably qualified to write, is full of traits going in the same
direction. One is rather sorry to find Mérimée siding with those who
would have mediocre authors kept out of literary histories, pretending
that a man may read too much (he was himself almost omnilegent), that
you can understand French seventeenth-century theatre (you cannot)
“without having read Campistron.” But this is the fanfaronade of a
modern Signor Pococurante, with a difference; and in the piece Mérimée
cannot help showing his own critical sense (whether consistently or not)
in his demand for more on the early literature, in his contempt of
symbolic and Germanising explanations of _Don Quixote_. Of the two
papers[643] which, with the “Beyle,” are the longest of his literary
essays, the “Cervantes” and the “Brantôme,” the latter has a mere
_coda_, the briefest possible, of true literary criticism, and the
former not very much of it. Even on his beloved Russians, Gogol,[644]
Pouchkine, Tourguénieff—though there was bound to be more here in the
case of an actual Introduction, so to say, at last by a Grand Master of
the Ceremonies of a new language and literature—there is hardly so much,
except perhaps on Pouchkine, as we should expect. Like Lockhart, to whom
he had a great resemblance, Mérimée hated “your d—d literary man” so
much, and feared so much to be mistaken for such a person, that he would
not, perhaps at last could not, be what he might have been as a critic.
But we could not do without the stories from _Charles IX._ to _Lokis_,
and we can very well do without criticism from him. So all, once more,
is for the best—a reflection which, when made in connection with
Mérimée, has unwonted piquancy.




                              CHAPTER III.

                     GOETHE AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES.

HAMANN—LICHTENBERG—HERDER—HIS DRAWBACKS OF TEDIOUSNESS, PEDAGOGY, AND
    “METEOROSOPHIA,” BUT GREAT MERITS—THE ‘FRAGMENTE’—THE ‘KRITISCHE
    WALDER’—THE ‘URSACHEN DES GESUNKNEN GESCHMACK,’ THE ‘IDEEN,’ ETC.—
    ‘AGE-, COUNTRY-, AND RACE-, CRITICISM’—SPECIMENS AND REMARKS—
    WIELAND—GOETHE—THE ‘HAMLET’ CRITICISM, ETC.—THE ‘SPRÜCHE IN PROSA’—
    THE STERNE PASSAGES—REVIEWS AND NOTICES—THE CONVERSATIONS—SOME MORE
    GENERAL THINGS: GOETHE ON SCOTT AND BYRON—ON THE HISTORIC AND
    COMPARATIVE ESTIMATE OF LITERATURE—SUMMING UP: THE MERITS OF
    GOETHE’S CRITICISM—ITS DRAWBACKS: TOO MUCH OF HIS AGE—TOO MUCH A
    UTILITARIAN OF CULTURE—UNDULY NEGLECTFUL OF LITERATURE AS
    LITERATURE—SCHILLER—HIS ÆSTHETIC DISCOURSES—THE BÜRGER REVIEW—THE
    ‘XENIEN’—THE CORRESPONDENCE WITH GOETHE—THE ‘NAÏVE AND SENTIMENTAL
    POETRY’—OTHERS: BÜRGER—RICHTER—THE ‘VORSCHULE DER ÆSTHETIK’—THE
    SO-CALLED “ROMANTIC SCHOOL”—NOVALIS—THE ‘HEINRICH’—THE EARLIER
    ‘FRAGMENTS’—THE LATER—HIS CRITICAL MAGNIFICENCE—TIECK—THE SCHLEGELS—
    THEIR GENERAL POSITION AND DRIFT—THE ‘CHARACTERISTIKEN’—A. W.: THE
    ‘KRITISCHE SCHRIFTEN’ OF 1828—ON VOSS—ON BÜRGER—THE ‘URTHEILE,’
    ETC.—THE ‘VORLESUNGEN ÜBER DRAMATISCHE KUNST UND LITERATUR’—THEIR
    INITIAL AND OTHER MERIT—THE SCHLEGELIAN POSITION—THE ‘VORLESUNGEN
    ÜBER SCHÖNE LITERATUR UND KUNST’—ILLUSTRATED STILL MORE BY
    FRIEDRICH—UHLAND—SCHUBARTH—SOLGER—PERIODICALS, HISTORIES, ETC.


There is a difficulty in writing about German criticism, especially in
the great period of Goethe’s productiveness, which hardly occurs in any
other department of our subject. Not only is there much positive
critical writing from all the writers, great and small, of the time, but
almost all the writings of the great ones are criticism of an indirect
and applied kind. The whole of German Literature from 1750 to 1830 is a
sort of _Seminar_—a kind of enormous and multifarious Higher Education
movement, pursued, with much more than half consciousness, by persons
often of great talent and sometimes of great genius. To give an account
of all this is impossible: if it were possible it would be really
improper, because much of what the Germans found out with infinite
labour was only what nations more fortunately situated in regard to
literary position had inherited, if they sometimes neglected their
inheritance. But they also found out certain things which other nations
had not: nor is it easy to combine an indication of these with an
account, full, but not too full, of the entire movement; and hardly any
two persons are likely to agree on the point where fulness is reached
but running over has not begun.

[Sidenote: _Hamann._]

An early and remarkable instance of this critical permeation is
Hamann,[645] the “Magus of the North.” If Hamann had been anything but a
German, superficial readers might take him for a quack; indeed, as it
is, they have done so, and possibly may still do so. After an early
visit to England—which was anything but fortunate, save that it imbued
him with English literature—and after trying various occupations, he
passed the greater part of his life in a very poor public employment. He
wrote large numbers of letters to Lindner, Herder, Moses Mendelssohn,
and other persons, and published many short treatises, of the most
miscellaneous in kind, and the most eccentric and occasionally
apocalyptic in style and title. But he was in reality as deadly a foe of
affectation and sham as Carlyle himself, who, no doubt, took not a
little from him. His polemic with his friend, and townsman, and
“high-honoured Herr-magister” Kant (whom, however, one shudders to find
elsewhere described as “ein guter _homunculus_”) does not concern us.
But it is almost impossible to read a few pages in his works without
coming across some literary reference, more or less remarkable when its
date is considered. As early as 1759 he writes[646] to Kant himself,
“Wir schreiben für ein Volk das Maler und Dichter fordert”; three years
later[647] he entitles two of his quaint little pieces “Author and
Critic,” “Reader and Critic,” and fills them with ironic wisdom. Earlier
than these last, in May 1761,[648] he has read Diderot, and, like
Lessing,[649] has discovered in and with him that rules are all very
well, but that there is something “more immediate, more intimate,
obscurer, but more certain” than the Rule.

He is harsh, but by no means wholly unjust (as indeed we have seen),
when he finds, in _The Elements of Criticism_, “Mehr Worte und Wendungen
als Sachen”; he knows Burke; and he leaves his “Magus”-tower to discuss
Baretti and Goldoni. Mystic as he is, he detects the emptiness of the
new Æsthetic:[650] and consistently champions direct perception of
literary and other beauty in individual cases. It is admitted that his
Shakespeare study[651] transmitted itself to Herder, upon whom he had
great influence: and, generally speaking, he may be said to have
exercised at least as much power in the germinal and stimulating way
upon the younger writers, who were to form the great generation, as
Lessing did in the way of dogma and method. Against the mere
_Aufklärung_ and against _Sturm und Drang_, Hamann was alike a
conservative and preservative agency: and he is one of the authors, now
getting terribly numerous, on whom I should like to spend much more time
and space than can be afforded here.

[Sidenote: _Lichtenberg._]

There are rather strong points of resemblance between Hamann and the
somewhat younger Lichtenberg. Both were very much influenced by visits
to England, and both show the inspiration or English humourists—
especially Swift—in their not exactly forced, but very decidedly
_purposed_, eccentricity. Lichtenberg, however, was more a man of this
world than the “Magus”: and he shows very much more of the passion of
the time for physics. Never did any one’s writings better deserve the
title of _Vermischte Schriften_[652] than his, consisting as they do,
for the most part, of a bewildering assemblage of mote-articles, ranging
from the question “Why Germany has no seaside watering-place,”[653] and
from an account of a “Sausage-Procession”[654] (which gives a foretaste
not merely of Jean Paul but of _Sartor Resartus_ itself) to serious
mathematical and physical discussions. Lichtenberg is perhaps best known
to English readers by his dealings with Garrick and other English
theatrical persons: but there is not a little pure literature in him,
outside as well as inside his two sets of titularly literary
_Bemerkungen_.[655] He has actual animadversions on Pope, on Swift, on
the early German drama even: but his most noteworthy critical
achievements are to be found in more general maxims and judgments, many
of them showing that creditable anxiety for the literary improvement of
his country which the best men of his generation all felt, and which was
rewarded in and by the next. He stigmatises that excessive _imitation_
which even here we have had to notice: he says plumply,[656] _Die
Deutschen lesen zu viel_; he is prophetically, as well as actually,
notable on the process of commenting and translating Shakespeare.[657]
But perhaps his best judgment-epigram is on that critical vice which is
the other extreme from general denigration. “Men call,” says he, “others
by the name of genius, as wood-lice [_Kelleresel_] are called
Millepedes. Not that they _have_ a thousand legs, but that people won’t
take the trouble to count!”

[Sidenote: _Herder._]

With Herder himself a different form of difficulty besets the historian.
Here there is no question of scattered literary _obiter dicta_ occurring
in a range of obstinately miscellaneous thinking. Twenty volumes[658] of
ostensibly and really literary work, of which something like a full half
is actual criticism, present themselves to the inquirer; he knows, and
everybody knows, that his author counts, as hardly anybody else, save
Lessing and Goethe, has counted, in the literary development of one of
the great “completely equipped”[659] literary nations of Europe; he can
see, if he has any eyes at all, that Herder is, with Lessing, Diderot,
and the shy and mainly apocryphal Gray, one of the very few leaders in
the conversion of Europe at large to a catholic study of literature. And
yet the arguments against any very full treatment of him in such a book
as this are twenty-legion strong.[Sidenote: _His drawbacks of
tediousness,_] In the first place, there is what I can only call a
certain fearful _woolliness_ about Herder’s literary work. It scarcely
ever compresses and crystallises itself into a solid and fiery
thunderbolt of literary expression. He himself, in the very forefront of
it,[660] speaks of “Die liebe Göttin Langeweile,” “the dear Goddess
Ennui,” as having “hunted many, if not most people, into the arms of the
Muses.” I am afraid it must be said that in his own case the dear
Goddess did not understand where her mission as matchmaker ended, and is
too frequently present at the interviews of man and Muse.

[Sidenote: _pedagogy,_]

In the second place, that pedagogic instinct which has been noted, which
is so excusable and so praiseworthy in him and in his contemporaries,
when we consider their circumstances and _milieu_, interferes somewhat
disastrously with the freedom and the lasting interest of his writing.
The Latin nations, by their inheritance of real or supposed prerogative
from Latin itself, we English by our alleged national self-sufficiency,
escape this in greater or less degree. All the four, Italians, French,
Spaniards, English, take themselves in their different degrees and
manners for granted; they are “men,” if only in the University sense.
The Germans of the mid-eighteenth century are, and take themselves for,
schoolboys: it is greatly to their credit, but it does not precisely
make them good reading without a great deal of good will. [Sidenote:
_and_ meteorosophia,] Lastly Herder, as it seems to me (though, no
doubt, not to others), in consequence of this sense of dissatisfaction
with his own literature, climbs too rapidly to generalisations about the
relation of literature itself to national character, and to the
connection of literature generally with the whole idea of humanity. All
this is noble; but we are in a bad position for doing it. It will be a
capital occupation for persons of a critical temperament when humanity
has come to an end—which it has not even yet, and which it certainly had
still less in Herder’s time.[661]

[Sidenote: _but great merits._]

These general disadvantages are indeed compensated by general merits of
a very eminent kind. Stimulated by Hamann, by Lessing, and by his own
soul, Herder betook himself, as nobody had done before him, to the
comparative study of literature, to the appreciation of folksong
(perhaps his best desert), to the examination of Ancient, Eastern,
Foreign literature in comparison with German. This is his great claim to
consideration in the history of literature and of criticism: and it is
so great a one that in general one is loath to cavil even at the most
extravagant expressions of admiration that have been lavished upon him.

[Sidenote: _The_ Fragmente.]

But individual examination of his works revives the objections taken
above. For instance, the early _Fragmente zur Deutschen Litteratur_[662]
has an almost unique _relative_ interest. I do not know where to look
for anything like it as a survey (or rather a collection of studies) of
a literature at a given period of its development. On the language; on
the prosody;[663] on the “rhetoric” in the narrow-wide sense, of German
after the close of the Seven Years’ War; on the chief authors and kinds
of its literature; on a vast number of minor points, positive and
comparative, in relation to it, Herder lavishes an amount of filial
devotion, of learning, of ability, which is quite admirable. Taken
_absolutely_, the value and the interest, and therefore the admiration,
shrink a little.

[Sidenote: _The_ Kritische Walder.]

The _Kritische Wälder_, which followed the _Fragmente_ in a couple of
years,[664] are occupied, first, with a sort of continuation of the work
of Winckelmann and of Lessing in the _Laocoön_ (a continuation which,
like its forerunners, busied itself chiefly with the arts other than
literature), and then with some work of Lessing’s enemy, Klotz,[665]
somewhat more directly literary in kind. Klotz, however, had busied
himself, and Herder necessarily busies himself in turn, with general
questions of the moral-literary type, especially in reference to Homer
and Virgil. The book is full of those curious _Rettungen_ or
“white-washings,” of which we have previously referred to an example in
speaking of Lessing on Horace. But it has not very much for us.

[Sidenote: _The_ Ursachen des Gesunknen Geschmack,]

There is some more, though the quality may be differently appreciated by
different persons, in the Prize Essay of 1773 on the _Causes of the
Decline of Taste in different Nations_:[666] and a great deal more in
the twenty years later _Ideen zur Geschichte und Kritik der Poesie und
bildenden Künste_.[667] In the first, Herder develops (not of course for
the first time, for Montesquieu had given the line long before, if he
had not applied it much to literature, and Du Bos had started it before
_him_, and Vico had in a manner anticipated both; but for the first time
in a wide, and at the same time not loose, application to literature
itself) the idea of Age- and Race-criticism—the close conjunction of a
general conception of the characteristics of a time and a country with
the phenomena observed or supposed to be observed in groups of literary
production. In theg second, at once generalising further, and descending
to further particulars, we have an attempt to connect literature with
general characteristics of humanity, and almost innumerable critical
experiments of this process, on different authors and schools and kinds.

[Sidenote: _the_ Ideen, _&c._]

Anything that has to be said in general on these processes is for the
Interchapters; but we may here repeat that no one can well exaggerate
their historical importance or the influence that they have exercised
since. Further, the merit of their combined precept and example, in
directing study at once to those features which are common in all
literature, and to the individual bodies by comparison of which the
general features are discernible, is quite beyond question. The Prize
Essay has perhaps the main defects of its kind, that of “figuring away”
in plausible gyration, without bringing home any very solid sheaves, or
even leaving any definite path. But the immense Miscellany of the
_Ideen_ more than makes up for this. Herder’s general scheme, here, in
the _Adrastea_,[668] in that _Aurora_ (suggested by the dawn of the
nineteenth century) which he only planned, and which was but a small
part of the huge adventures for which he died lamenting his lack of
time, may be described as that of a mediæval collection of _Quæstiones
Quodlibetales_, methodised by the presence throughout of his leading
practical and theoretic ideas. [Sidenote: Age-, Country-, and Race-,
Criticism] These were, as has been said, the necessity of enriching
German literature with material, and furnishing it with patterns,
“plant,” and processes, by the study of _all_ literature, ancient and
modern, as a practical and immediate aim; and the working out of the
notions of literature, as connected with the country, and literature, as
connected with the general race, for ultimate goal.

[Sidenote: _Specimens and Remarks._]

But, owing to the enormous _dissipation_,—the constant flitting from
flower to flower which his task imposed on him,—Herder was not and could
not be a very important critic on particular points. He was bound to
share the over-valuation of _Ossian_[669]—for was not _Ossian_ exactly
what was wanted to dissolve and lubricate the _sècheresse_ of
French-German enlightenment, and did it not appear to give a brilliant
new example of “national” literature? So we must not overblame him for
this, any more than we must overpraise him—while praising him heartily—
for having been undoubtedly the main agent in inoculating the Germans
with Shakespeare.[670] Elias Schlegel had begun the process, and Hamann
had continued it; but the first was cut off too early for him to do more
than make a beginning, and Hamann’s mission was rather to send others,
including Herder himself, than to work directly upon the general. It is
also fair to say that, with all his soaring ideals and world-wide
aspirations of mental travel, there was little _Schwärmerei_ about
Herder, except in a few semi-poetical passages, which can easily be
skipped. His judgment is a pretty sound and sensible one, if his taste
is not infallible—see for instance his remarks on political poetry (xvi.
169, _op. cit._), and the equally modest and intelligent observations
which follow on the impossibility of emulating or surpassing the special
qualities of foreign literatures, however useful these literatures may
be for study.[671] To any nation Herder must have been a useful and
stimulating teacher; to the Germans at this time he was simply
invaluable. But the definition of his general scope, and these few
particulars of his procedure, must suffice us here.[672]

[Sidenote: _Wieland._]

Wieland, the other chief of German _belles lettres_ between Lessing and
Goethe, is also one of those writers—necessarily thickening upon us as
we proceed—who were very important to their own times and countries, but
whose importance historically is here less a matter for detailed
investigation than for general summary. His extensive work[673] is full
of criticism; indeed his position as editor of the _Teutsche Merkur_ was
one of the most responsible and not of the least influential in the
great German period. The curious modernised-classical or
classicalised-modern novels and miscellanies of which he was so fond—
especially the _Abderiten_—abound in it, in a more or less dissolved and
diffused state; the seven or eight volumes of his miscellaneous
works[674] contain more in a precipitated and concentrated condition.
Now he will ask—but perhaps not answer—the question, “Was ist eine
schöne Seele?”[675] then discourse (after the fashion of Burke and
Barnwell and Bulwer) on “the Relation of the Agreeable and Beautiful to
the Useful”;[676] then come closer still to real practical criticism in
the interesting “Sendschriften an einen Jungen Dichter” of 1784.[677]
The alphabetically arranged reviews and notices which fill, or help to
fill, the three last volumes deal with all manner of authors and books,
from Aristophanes to the _Amadis_, and from Louise Labé to Luis Vivès.
In all, modified to some extent by the influence which his greater
juniors exercised latterly on him, there appears that somewhat rococo,
but interesting, attractive, and very largely beneficent blend or
coupling of wit and imagination (or at least fancy) which is Wieland’s
characteristic, and which undoubtedly did much—very much—to raise the
Germans out of another and much less attractive mixture of pedantry and
horse-play and bombast. But his individual critical utterances are of
less importance to us. And so to Goethe himself.

[Sidenote: _Goethe._]

In a certain sense the whole six-and-thirty volumes[678] of Goethe’s
work, with all the _Letters_ and _Conversations_ added, may be said to
be a record of his criticism: in this sense he certainly deserved the
hackneyed “nothing if not—--” But for our purposes, though we may step
beyond them now and then, the famous passages in _Wilhelm Meister_ and
elsewhere (especially “Shakespeare und Keine Ende”) on Shakespeare, the
_Sprüche in Prosa_, the collected papers on German and other literature,
and the _Conversations_ with Eckermann, will give a sufficient
collection of texts. The _Xenien_ will be more conveniently postponed
till we deal with their other author.

[Sidenote: _The_ Hamlet _criticism, &c._]

One thing must or should have struck every reader (at all accustomed to
draw conclusions from what he reads) about the _Hamlet_ passages in
_Meister_.[679] _These passages might have been written by a man who was
only acquainted with a prose translation of the piece into a language
other than its own._ This may seem a little staggering: but it is true.
Goethe handles—with extraordinary and for the most part unerring
insight—the characters, the situations, the conduct of the play. But
there he stops dead. Of its magnificent and ineffable poetical
_expression_—of those phrases and passages which, read hundreds of times
through scores of years, produce as much effect on the fit reader as at
first, and more—he says nothing. “Shakespeare und Keine Ende” tells the
same story: nearly all, if not all, the scattered references from the
Frankfort speech of 1771, when he was just of age, to the last remark to
Eckermann sixty years later, tell the same. It is at least a curious
one. One begins to wonder whether the person who wrote Shakespeare was,
not Bacon, but, say, Wieland.

[Sidenote: _The_ Sprüche in Prosa.]

Many things, however, might, and some perhaps shall, be said about this.
Let us turn to the more miscellaneous and general utterances of the
_Sprüche in Prosa_, which, with the parallel verse jottings, especially
some of the _Zahme Xenien_, are recognised as supplying a sort of
running accompaniment of Goethe’s thought, for all periods of his life.
No one (again with the same slight goodwill to think) can read far in
either of these divisions, much less in both of them, without perceiving
the very strong, we might almost call it the overbearing, practical and
ethical tendency, even of those passages which apparently bear most
closely on literature. All the best things are _generalised_ as much as
possible, with perhaps some forgetfulness of the writer’s own caution
about _Allgemeine Begriffe_.[680] In these generalities there is much
that is admirable, such as the famous “Superstition is the poetry of
life,”[681] and the much less known but very striking “Rhythmical
movement has something magical about it: it makes us believe that the
Sublime is our own property.”[682] The danger appears in his
often-quoted comparison of Classicism to Health and Romanticism to
disease[683]—if he had said “Classicism is precaution against disease:
Romanticism is making the best of that which must come,” there would
have been something to say for him. But it is far off in the admirable,
“There are pedants who are also scoundrels; and they are the worst of
all.”[684]

But when we pass from these generalities—disputable sometimes,
indisputable not seldom, almost always stimulating—to individual
judgments, the case is a little altered. If he had oftener written such
notes as “_Vis superba formæ_. _Ein schönes Wort von Johannes
Secundus_,”[685] it had been better. What is the good of saying of
_Henry IV._[686] that “If everything else extant of the kind were lost,
we could restore poetry and rhetoric completely out of this alone”?
Nobody shall outgo me in rational admiration of _Henry IV._ I will not
give up a hair of Doll Tearsheet’s head, nor a blush of the page’s
cheek. Everything in it is good: but to say that everything that is good
is in it would deepen the inscrutable smile on Shakespeare’s face a
little less inscrutably. The saying, however, may perhaps be allowed the
credit, as well as the discredit, due to enthusiastic exaggerations.
This is not the case with the passages on Sterne,[687] which are
numerous, which form a tolerably complete context, and which are yet
separated from each other, and returned upon, in a fashion which shows
what a strong impression the subject had made on the writer’s mind.

[Sidenote: _The Sterne passages._]

We begin with the sufficiently round statement, “Yorick Sterne was the
finest[688] spirit that ever worked. Whosoever reads him has at once the
feeling of freedom and beauty; his humour is inimitable, and not every
kind of Humour frees the soul.” Now, as a thing said once, this would be
surprising enough, however well we may think of Sterne: but Goethe does
not leave it alone. After the widest casts round to the general aspects
of Poetry and Science, Art and Humour, he circles back to “Tristram.”
“Even at this moment” (the context shows that this must have been pretty
late in his life), “every man of culture should take his works once more
in hand, that the nineteenth century may learn what we owe him already,
and look out for what we may still owe him.” Another page and more of
generalities, and he harks back again. “Sterne was born in 1713 and died
in 1768. To comprehend him one must not leave out of consideration the
moral and ecclesiastical state of his time: we should remember that he
was Warburton’s contemporary.” And then a context of notes remarks on
his “free spirit,” “his power of developing things from within,” of
“distinguishing truth from falsehood,” his “hatred for the
didactic-dogmatic, the pedantic tendencies of the serious”; his wide
reading and discoveries of “the inadequate and the ridiculous”; his
“boundless sagacity and penetration,” and a great many other things.
Admitting that Sterne is “never a model,” he thinks him “always
suggestive and stimulating,” and makes the charitable remark that “the
element of coarseness in him, _in which he moves so carefully and
elegantly_, might have spoilt many others.”

Now this is at first odder than the hyperbole about _Henry IV._, and
takes one’s breath away more completely for the moment. One may have a
very strong liking for “Atalanta’s better part,” for the lightness,
grace, good sense, refreshing qualities of Shandyism, and a very great
admiration for Sterne’s genius, especially for the uniqueness, if not
exactly the impeccability, of its literary expression. But to make of
him, even to the extent to which it is possible to make of his master
Rabelais, an author to be turned over by day and night, a _vade mecum_,
a great teacher, a literary discoverer and deliverer, the “finest spirit
that ever worked”—this is really going rather too far. Yet the point of
view is perfectly obvious, and it is equally obvious that it is not a
literary point of view at all. Goethe felt severely the Philistinism of
his own country, and he had—as most Continentals always have had, and as
some dear good Englishmen think it proper still to have—the idea that
England was specially dominated by the weaver’s beam. Sterne to him is a
David: his jests and pranks are the small stones of the brook, and he
thinks of nothing more than of the discomfiture of Goliath.

Yet he could be Philistine enough himself, as where, in _Shakespeare und
Keine Ende_, having talked of the universality of Shakespeare[689] more
mysteriously and pretentiously, but far less intelligently and forcibly,
than Dryden a century and more earlier, he tells us that “Coriolanus is
_pervaded throughout_ by the chagrin experienced at the refusal of the
mob to recognise the choice of its betters.” In _Julius Cæsar_
“_everything rests on_ the idea that the leaders are averse to seeing
the highest place filled, because they wrongly imagine that they can
work successfully in co-operation.” _Antony and Cleopatra_ “declares
with a thousand tongues [_plus_ a thousand copybook headings?] that idle
enjoyment is incompatible with a life of activity.” We have all heard of
Goethe as a great and true Apollo, a Philistine-slayer from youth to
age. Was there ever more platitudinous and trivial chatter of Ashdod
than in these three sentences? And how, again, when we find him, like a
seventeenth-century Preceptist, dividing literary motives into
Progressive, Retrogressive, Retardative, Retrospective, and
Anticipatory, a list which yet once again sets one thinking, with a
shameful joy, on possible Rabelaisian developments and parodies of it?
Is our own poor Alison, with his Bandit unequally yoked to a Grecian
nose[690]—are the poor Le Bossus and Rapins themselves—to be scoffed at,
when we find this Jove of Weimar and Germany laying it down that
“Christians contending with Christians will not, especially in later
times, form a good picture,” but that “Christians conquering Turks” are
admissible?

[Sidenote: _Reviews and Notices._]

The very numerous literary reviews and notices which fill nearly two
volumes[691] of the Works in the edition we are using must, of course,
be read by every one who desires to acquaint himself thoroughly with
Goethe’s criticism: but they have not quite the importance which they
might be expected to have, and very often, when they are at their best,
that best comes to little or nothing more than we find condensed and
quintessenced in a maxim of the _Sprüche_ or a sentence of the
_Conversations_. This indeed could not be otherwise: for the most
“panoramic intellect” (a phrase which Goethe acknowledged with rather
sardonic politeness when it was applied to him by some English
critic[692]) cannot see, and the most facund tongue cannot say, the same
thing differently every time. Even in the earliest there are very neat
things, as where[693] poor Sulzer’s _Die Schönen Künste_ is described in
the opening sentence of the review as “Very suitable for translation
into French: indeed it might very well have been translated _from_
French.” The very latest, such as that on Mérimée’s _La Guzla_,[694]
display that combination of fresh interest, impartial judgment, and
experienced knowledge which ought to be the reviewer’s equipment, but
which unluckily few attain.

[Sidenote: _The_ Conversations.]

On the whole, however, the _Conversations with Eckermann_ are the
richest _placer_ of Goethe’s criticism, and the most convenient for the
general reader. There appears to be no reason for any exaggerated
scruples about admitting them as genuine and trustworthy. Eckermann, no
doubt, has some of the irritating qualities which are almost inseparable
from the Boswellian temperament: one need not be ashamed of enjoying
that characteristic Heinesquery, the regret

                      “Dass Goethe sei todt,
                      Und Eckermann sei zu Leben.”

But this need not prevent our being thankful that Eckermann remained _zu
Leben_ long enough to put these things on record. There is nothing in
the least disloyal or disgusting about them: the sternest hater of
eavesdropping need not be afraid or ashamed to take up the book. And
Eckermann seems to have been very fairly in possession of the two
positive and the one negative qualities required by his difficult and
rather thankless art—exactness, intelligence up to a certain point, and
the absence of the superfluous cleverness which might have tempted him
to refine, and touch up, and overlay. Therefore some analysis of the
chief critical utterances of the book should find a place here. It must,
moreover, always be remembered that Goethe was a man soaked in
literature, and that those who read him without having at least dipped
in it are apt to make mistakes.[695] Pretty early we have one of those
striking generalities which catch mankind, and which—in a sense not
unjustly—have earned their author his immense reputation. “Fact must
give the motive, the points that require expression the particular
kernel; but to make a beautiful enlivened whole, _that_ is the business
of the poet.”[696] The practical advice about a certain job of
verse[697] is as good as it can be, and as we should expect it to be; to
find a better and more _conscious_ craftsman of letters than Goethe, you
may take the wings of the morning and put a girdle round the earth in
vain. Nor perhaps is much more needed than mere quotation for the three
words on the opposite page, _Ach, das Publikum!_ There is a very
noteworthy passage[698] on Schiller and his philosophy, and a still more
noteworthy one,[699] indeed one of the cardinal places of the whole, on
the character of writers, with a context—accidental as far as dates go
(for there is a full fortnight between them), but real in thought—on
Style.

The classification of his enemies[700] is very interesting and curious,
as are, both from the critical and the personal standpoint, the
observations[701] on Klopstock and Herder. But what follows[702]
immediately, on the contemporarily intimate relations between France and
Germany in literature, is more noteworthy still, and so is, especially
when we take account of the dates and of other places, Goethe’s
dissuasion[703] of Eckermann from undertaking a _compte-rendu_ of German
Literature for an English Review. At this very time[704] the _Globe_ was
being founded in Paris: and Goethe’s admiration for the _Globe_ was
unbounded. J. J. Ampère he knew personally: but the praise which so
constantly recurs applies to Sainte-Beuve, Rémusat, and others almost
more than to Ampère. In one place later, he expresses his surprise that
these young French reviewers did not think it necessary, as the Germans
did, to “hate one another” if they differed in opinion.[705] Alas! the
disease was not, and is not, confined to Germany: and it certainly did
not spare these same contributors to the _Globe_. But their width of
range, their comparative spirit, their judicial and yet not pedagogic
manner, justly enchanted Goethe. And it was doubtless because he did
not, in 1824, think it possible for a reviewer to show them, that he
bade Eckermann not “eat the beans” of reviewing.

The passage[706] which naturally and immediately follows on the
connection of German and English literature, and the frank avowal of the
enormous indebtedness of the former to the latter, is deservedly famous,
and certainly shows Goethe most favourably in the light of that combined
lamp of intelligence, learning, and character which he himself always
liked to turn on his subject. But one does not read with so much
satisfaction what follows at a little distance on the sufficiency of
translation,[707] a passage at which, I feel sure, all the Muses wept.
Scientifically, morally, practically, translation can do much: from the
point of view of pure literature, all it can do is to supply something
different from the original—good perhaps, bad perhaps, between the two
most probably, but never _the_ original. Once more he refers
valuably[708] to the great older contemporaries of his youth—Lessing,
Herder, Wieland, as well as to Schiller. Always we may apply to Goethe
when he speaks of Schiller what Thackeray says so well of Pope[709] when
he speaks of Swift. His remarks on Menander in more places than one
supply a very curious document, or item of a document, as to his
criticism generally, when we reflect in what a fragmentary state the
great New Comic has come down to us. Many notable passages on
Shakespeare and Molière follow: indeed, the various contexts on Molière
should be as carefully looked at and compared as those on Shakespeare,
Byron, and Scott. They will form, with these, the chief bases of our
general estimate of Goethe’s criticism.

The judgment[710] of January 1827 on Hugo is famous and interesting.
More favourable than later ones, it shows the critic’s eclecticism, if
not quite his catholicity. He saw, and saw rightly, the connection with
Chateaubriand: and we must not _now_ be too severe on him for thinking
_then_ that Hugo “may be as important as Lamartine and Delavigne.” A
less agreeable side of his criticism—one to which we have had, and shall
have, to turn and return—is the remark on Flemming,[711] _er kann jetz
nicht mehr helfen_. Now Flemming certainly was not a very great poet; he
_has_ only “a very pretty talent, rather prosaic and _bourgeois_.” But
the “er kann jetz nicht mehr _helfen_” is hard to forgive. It is a point
of view which has done harm to many, notably to Mr. Arnold: but that is
between the Muses and themselves. What concerns us, is that it is bad in
itself. The idea that such and such a writer “won’t _pay_,” that you
can’t “get culture” out of him, is the pure Philistinism of culture
itself. It is the exact analogue to the theory and practice of “saving
your own dirty soul” in religion. What does it matter whether he “helps”
or not, if he is good and, in his own little or large measure, delights?
This calculus of profit is mighty disgusting and, we may add, mighty
dangerous: for it is at the root of much of the bad criticism in the
world.

He is in his better mind, and in his own sphere, with the remark[712]
that now, fifty years ago, and fifty years hence, it is, was, will be so
that what men wrote when they were young will be best enjoyed by young
men. And we may note in passing wise and witty things on destructive
criticism,[713] on Smollett,[714] on _Lazaret-poesie_,[715] before
leaving with a good taste in our mouth, the first and, for literary
utterances I think the weightiest, volume of the _Conversations_.

A good example of that common-sense judgment which is perhaps Goethe’s
chief claim as a critic is to be found early in vol. ii.,[716] where he
speaks of Aristotle as “rash in his opinions.” At first sight this may
seem not merely impertinent, but contradictory of the facts: and yet
there is much in it. Undoubtedly Aristotle, great as he is, _was_ rash,
with the peculiar Greek rashness of imagining that Greek facts were all
facts: and this was nowhere more the case than in his literary
criticism. We may be less happy—on the same page and the next—with a
repetition of Philistinisms against Fouqué and the Middle Ages, about
there being “nothing worth our fetching from these dim old German
times,” or with an additional mistake (which again has done much harm)
about the “miseries” of these said times and the uselessness of adding
them to our own. How much better is a fresh application of “the apples
of gold and pictures [frames] of silver,” a metaphor of which he was
fond, a little later! “Die Frauen,” says he,[717] “sind silberne Schalen
in die _wir_ goldene Aepfel legen.” In other words, their worth and
their fairness are their fairness and their worth to _our_ imagination,
which indeed is the conclusion of the whole matter, not merely in
gynæcology. His statement as to Voltaire[718] that “everything which so
great a talent writes is good,” is interesting to compare with the
direct negative of Joubert. And it may repay anybody if he thinks a
little about its connection with a more general and very important
statement of Goethe’s, that “in Art and Poetry Personality is
everything,”[719] wherewith also it were well to combine his frequent
references[720] to his favourite idea of the “dæmonic.” His extreme and
repeated[721] admiration of _Daphnis and Chloe_ (undoubtedly a charming
thing) is to be noted.

The third volume, giving us[722] Eckermann’s second skimmings of his
notes and memories, is, perhaps naturally, less fruitful, but it is far
from barren. Another of the audacious and felicitous phrases which have
done so much to establish Goethe’s fame is that[723] about Shakespeare’s
“unflustered, innocent, _sleepwalkerish_ manner of production”: and the
passage on Schlegel[724] is a good combination of magnanimity and
veracity. One of the strangest blunders of interpretation ever made by
such a man is that by which he makes[725] Macduff’s “He has no children”
apply to Macbeth instead of to Malcolm, thereby not only making
necessary a clumsy explaining-away of Lady Macbeth’s own words, but
spoiling the poetry of the actual passage. In the same context comes the
contradiction of himself, that Shakespeare thought mainly of the stage
when he wrote.[726] On the other hand, the passage[727] on Burns,
Béranger, and the effect on literary talent of an exciting atmosphere of
various kinds, from the clash of sentiment and thought in a city like
Paris to the inspiration of traditional ballad-literature, is all but
consummate in a certain way.

Then read him on the _incommensurableness_ of poetry,[728] and (in a
happier vein about Classic and Romantic than that which has been
noticed) pronouncing[729] that, for all the fuss (_Lärme_) about the
two, “a work that is good all through will be a classic sure enough,”
and you may leave him in a state of reconciliation which, in wise
persons, will not be disturbed by later utterances on French authors,
Guizot, Villemain, Mérimée, Victor Hugo even, though on the latter you
may think that he has got at a wrong angle. After all, one may say that
Hugo and not Goethe was in that position: for few persons with a
critical head now think of the author of _Marion de l’Orme_ as they
think of the author of the _Contemplations_ and the _Légende_.

[Sidenote: _Some more general things: Goethe on Scott and Byron._]

To proceed from particulars to mediate generalities, a very instructive
light on Goethe’s general critical attitude may be obtained by comparing
his expressions in regard to Scott and to Byron.[730] He admires both.
But in regard to Scott he justifies his admiration. His analysis to
Eckermann[731] of _The Fair Maid of Perth_ is really critical: he points
out how good this passage is, how cunningly that episode is worked in,
how powerful is that other picture. He praises _Rob Roy_ in the same
manner,[732] “going at the jugular,” selecting the truth of detail, the
_unendliche Fleiss in den Vorstudien_ (the very thing which shallow
critics deny to Scott), and so forth. Now, his eulogies of Byron are
quite different. They are nearly all in generals; the most definite
passage that I remember, about the wigshops and lamplighters in _Don
Juan_, comes from Eckermann’s mouth, not Goethe’s. The great man himself
is struck by Byron’s social and political position; he is lost in wonder
at Byron’s real or supposed revolt against what he, like others,
supposes to have been English Philistinism (the Philistinism of
Shakespeare, Swift, Fielding!), and the like. It is never a phrase, a
passage, a situation, hardly ever a book[733] that he praises. And I do
not know a closer approach to the merely and purely _bête_ in a writer
of the greatest literary, and of great critical, genius than the
remark[734] that a few lines of _Don Juan_ “poison the whole
_Gerusalemme_.” It would be as sensible to say that one stanza of Tasso
is an antidote to the whole of _Don Juan_. The two things are
“incommensurable,” and severed by a gulf.

[Sidenote: _On the historic and comparative estimate of literature._]

Another remarkable thing about Goethe’s criticism, which might be
illustrated from the _Sprüche_, from Eckermann, and from other sources,
may again surprise those who have simply adopted the common opinion of
him as an apostle of universal culture. Curiously enough, he, the
“Doctor Universalis” of nineteenth-century literature, as some would
make him, distinctly discourages and disparages that historic study of
Comparative Letters which is the distinguishing nineteenth-century
principle. His warning to the Germans, that they have most to lose by
the introduction of a “world-literature,” is no doubt true enough _ad
hoc_ or _ad hos_: and when, close by, he emits the wish, “May the study
of Greek and Roman literature remain the basis of the higher Culture,”
we can only say “Amen, and Amen” ever-lastingly. But his stigmatisation
of Chinese, Indian, Egyptian literatures as _Curiositäten_—useless for
moral and æsthetic culture—is very tell-tale: and even the most
experienced person may be slightly shocked when he finds Goethe
extending this taboo to European-mediæval letters as well.[735]

[Sidenote: _Summing up: the merits of Goethe’s criticism._]

I hope that it is not extravagant to think that this selection of the
actual facts of the case, individual and grouped, may serve to base,
with some solidity, a judgment of Goethe’s actual position as a critic.
For a considerable time, let us say roundly the middle forty years of
the nineteenth century, from 1830 to 1870, this position, very mainly
owing to the efforts of a large number of great men from Carlyle
downwards, was exalted to the very skies: and even more recently it has
been rather left alone than seriously attacked. The causes of this—
causes which to some extent are true causes and must always operate—may
be put shortly as follows. Goethe possessed, to an extraordinary degree,
and later perhaps than any one else, that singular _wisdom_ which has
been more than once animadverted upon as the property, in the strict
sense, of the eighteenth century. He was, for half its length and for
nearly two-thirds of his own life, a man of its own: and he never
escaped, or wished to escape, entirely from its influence. He was always
“in touch” with life and fact: there was “no nonsense about him,” to use
an excellent vernacular phrase which, if somewhat double-edged, has a
keen and heavily backed edge on the favourable side. There are no
“Samothracian mysteries of bottled moonshine” in him; the most
apparently dreamy parts of his loftiest and greatest things, such as the
second part of _Faust_, are always, like natural and healthy dreams,
merely sublimations of actual facts—experienced or capable of being
experienced.

But further, and on the other hand, he had, from very early youth, and
by the favour of those of “the Mothers” who allow men of great genius to
anticipate and combine the gifts which most have only later and
separately, a very strong infusion indeed of Romance _and_ of Science—
the two apparently opposite characteristics of the century to which his
last thirty years belonged. He had hardly a touch of the special
stupidity which accompanied the special cleverness of his earlier
century—the degeneration of “common-sense.” In him the fashionable and
epidemic diseases of the Neo-classic period were neutralised by the
appropriate agencies, without any of these turning to the morbid. The
comparison of _Goetz_ with _The Robbers_ is an education in pathological
criticism. Nobody ever served under two flags with such honour and
credit as Goethe; he may even be said to have effected, if not alone,
yet mainly, a reconciliation and junction of arms between his two
masters. Yet again his almost unique mastery (just glanced at) of the
tendencies of the morrow; his sympathy, in his age, and when he was in a
way the greatest man of letters in Europe, with the ideas, tastes,
aspirations of quite young men—not merely secured, but to no very small
extent deserved, the enthusiastic adhesion of these latter. And when we
add to these powerful general things his extraordinary literary gifts,
the still more extraordinary range of his interests, the Olympian
good-nature of his character, and his singular, and almost supra- or
infra-human, avoidance of extremes, it ceases to be at all surprising
that the position above noted should have seemed to good wits to be his:
it may even seem ungracious, pedantic, absurd to take any exceptions to
it.

[Sidenote: _Its drawbacks: too much of his age._]

Yet the exceptions must be taken, and, if possible, made good. The
greatest of them—at least, according to those general lines which he
himself loved and followed—is connected with that peculiarity of his
which has been noticed a few lines previously. He is just a little too
much of the day and the morrow combined—not enough of yesterdays and
to-morrows far behind and far ahead. The least local and temporary of
those who are for an age—possessor of the widest “age” perhaps of them
all—he is still of that age, and, except in criticisms that are of life
rather than of literature, not sufficiently of all time. As we have seen
and shown, he cannot duly appreciate the Middle Ages; and the fact that
others were over-appreciating them does not excuse him a whit. In his
formative precepts he looks too much to what he thought the requirements
of actual nineteenth-century literature—a modified Romanticism, not
excluding Science. In other words, he keeps time without winding for a
longer period than any other clock on record, but he is perhaps rather
impossible to wind afresh. On that calculus of his own which we have
disallowed and protested against, which we shall shortly disallow and
protest against afresh, one might too often say that _he_ cannot “help
us any more.” He is not as “rash in his opinions” as he thought
Aristotle was, but he is more inadequate; we can nowadays allow for and
discard Aristotle’s rashness, and find abundance of the eternal left in
him, and we cannot quite do this with Goethe. We must sometimes, with
Aristotle, have, and mark, the side-note, “This was a man of the fourth
century B.C.”; we must always with Goethe have the other, “This was the
cleverest man of 1770-1830.” Take him again with Longinus, and we find
that Longinus needs hardly any side-note at all—only here and there in
utterances such as that about the _Odyssey_. And I at least think that
Coleridge, though he certainly needs it here and there, needs it
seldomer, far seldomer, than Goethe.

[Sidenote: _Too much a utilitarian of Culture._]

But there is another count. Goethe, as everybody knows, had a private
chapel (which has bred chantries and churches and cathedrals all over
the world), with an ephod and teraphim and everything complete,
dedicated to the great god, Cham-Chi-Thaungu, otherwise called Culture.
It is ill to be joined to any idols: and this was well seen of him.
“This cannot help us,” he says constantly; “we cannot fetch any good out
of this.” “Such times, such books, such men have nothing to say for us.”
Now, such sentences, from the point of view of the really higher
criticism, are anathema, because they are _negative_. The corresponding
positives are not condemnable at all. If a thing does help any one, if
any can fetch good, or delight, out of it, it passes at once—in a low
class perhaps, perhaps in a high—but it passes. That it does _not_ help
any particular person proves nothing at all. If the work is good, on its
own scale and specification, it can afford to wait for the persons whom
it will help, to whom it will “give culture.” Its beauty is its sole
duty. Indeed “What _is_ culture?” is a question to be asked not at all
jestingly, and it will be hard to find the answer.

[Sidenote: _Unduly neglectful of literature as literature._]

Yet once more the specimens given (I believe quite fairly) above entitle
us—and all but the most blindly fanatical _Goetheaner_ will find it hard
to _dis_entitle us from the observation—to observe in them a constant
deflection from strictly literary consideration of things. He likes to
consider “poetry” rather than “poesy,” poets rather than poetry; and in
poets he is always considering the not strictly poetical qualities. He
extols, for instance, in a well-known passage, Byron’s “Keckheit,
Kühnheit, Grandiosität.” Now the last, though a somewhat questionable,
may be a real, poetical quality: but what is there essentially poetical
in _Keckheit_ and _Kühnheit_? The occasion requiring them, it is good
that a poet—as that a fox-hunter, a sub-lieutenant left in command of
the regiment, a householder facing a fire or a burglar at two o’clock in
the morning—should have them: but what is there specially _poetical_
about them? On the contrary, may not a man have them and be, in virtue
of having them, a bad, and the worse, poet? Character, conduct,
personality (the second construed in a liberal way), these things are
what Goethe is always harping on. Now, ten generations of foes and
friends have (with the good leave of some friends as well as foes of
mine) been able to make out next to nothing at all about Shakespeare’s
character, conduct, and personality. Yet most people think that
Shakespeare was, let us say, one of the great poets of the world.
Shelley’s character was rather weak; his conduct was sometimes
disgusting; his personality, though generally amiable, is very vague;
and some of us think him the “next poet,” not merely the next English
poet, to Shakespeare. We may be wrong: but our case is a case.

Therefore, insolent absurdity as it may seem, I venture to doubt whether
Goethe’s criticism is of the absolutely greatest value. We have met with
many marks or notes of the true critic in our “journey across Chaos,”
and some of them Goethe has. But there are most important ones which he
lacks. That he is a great _dramatic_ critic I can very well admit: but
his very greatness here, on the principle more than once referred to,
makes him a dubious critic of literature. For the Goethe of _Faust_ (not
least of the Second Part of it), of the best lyrics, and of some other
things, I have, and for a great number of years have had, almost
unlimited admiration: for the critical Goethe I feel very much less.
That, assisted by natural xenomania, he was a great revelation to
Englishmen seventy, eighty, even a hundred years ago, I can very well
allow and believe: that he was a valuable populariser of a critical
attitude, useful as an alterative to that of Neo-classicism, I know. But
I am less sure that there is much in him, as he would himself say, for
us now. Aristotle, Longinus, Coleridge, are _creeds_: though the first
and second are too succinct and the last too discursive and full of
_lacunæ_. I can admit even Scaliger, even Boileau, to be of the calibre
of a will-worship. But Goethe, the critical Goethe, has too much the
character of a superstition, now rather stale.

[Sidenote: _Schiller._]

Schiller’s critical position, which some have estimated very highly,
depends first upon the collection of small æsthetic treatises, and of a
few actual reviews, which is included in his prose works;[736] secondly,
in his share of the _Xenien_; and thirdly, in the critical utterances of
his _Letters_, especially those in the correspondence with Goethe,
though by no means neglecting those to others, especially Körner. With
regard to the first part of the first division, extraordinary importance
has been attached to it by some—importance which a wary person would be
slow to accept on trust, when he remembers, not merely the remarks of A.
W. Schlegel, a declared unfriend, but those of Goethe, Schiller’s
unflinching defender, and those of Novalis, a very competent and
apparently quite dispassionate observer.[737] Much, however, will of
course depend on the estimation in which “æsthetic salt for putting on
the tail of the Ideal”[738] is itself held.

[Sidenote: _His Æsthetic Discourses._]

The very strong inclination of the poet towards the abstract discussion
is shown in his “Dissertation on the Connection of the Animal Nature of
man with the Spiritual,” written and printed in his twenty-first year:
as well as in others nearly as early. And few things of the kind can be
more curious than the comparison of the “Briefe über _Don Carlos_” with
such other defences of a man’s own work as Dryden’s or Corneille’s.[739]
The Discourses on Tragedy,[740] which appeared in the _Thalia_ for 1792,
of course have their interest. But Schiller’s most noteworthy exercises
in this direction have, I believe, been generally thought to be the
æsthetic discourses of the Fourteenth volume[741] and those on “Naïve
and Sentimental Poetry,”[742] and on “The Sublime” in the Fifteenth.

[Sidenote: _The Bürger review._]

This also contains the few reviews preserved. Of these, the most
remarkable is the unlucky one on Bürger, as to which I can only say
that, having first read it when I had not read A. W. Schlegel’s
reply,[743] and did not know the tenor of this, I had anticipated
Schlegel’s verdict, that it is “an offence against literary morality.”
In one case, therefore, however humble, Schiller’s later plea,[744] that
posterity would do justice to the uprightness of his intentions, has not
itself been justified: and I cannot think that it can have been so in
many others. For, though the ill side of human nature will always
rejoice in its own likeness, and though, even putting this aside, there
is still a singular notion abroad that an abusive review must be an
honest and well-intentioned one, _this_ review is one of the worst ever
written, and in one of its own latter sentences it writes itself down
so. Bürger, we are told, has “wealth of poetical painting, the glowing
and energetic language of the heart, a streamer of poetry, now waving
gorgeously, now caressingly floating, and [finally] an honest heart that
speaks from every line.” If it were possible to imagine a reader who did
not know _Lenore_ or anything of the rest, and who had worked patiently
through the pages on pages of carping and sneering which lead up to this
astonishing confession, we can only suppose that he would gasp for
breath, and wonder whether he had turned over half a dozen sheets at
once and come upon the end of a quite different paper.

The truth appears to be that Schiller, with all his talent, all his
genius, was something of a prig: and a prig is capable of almost any
discreditable act. It has often been pointed out that for the author of
_Die Räuber_ to find fault with Bürger as not being strictly proper is
“rather too rich”: but it must be remembered that when Schiller wrote
_Die Räuber_ he was a prig too, though a prig in a fit of
unconventional, Bohemian, and _Sturm-und-Drang_ priggishness. _Here_ the
cold fit had followed the hot. The poet of the Moors is now busied with
“the man of culture,” with “Idealising art which collects and mirrors
all the morality, all the character, all the wisdom of the time,” and
which of course rejects equally raptures about “Molly,” and childish
things about the dead riding fast. He informs us, with the true superior
air, that Bürger “not seldom mingles with the People, to whom he should
only let himself condescend.” And he has succeeded, marvellous to say,
in reducing _ad absurdum_ the argument against popularity as a test of
poetry, in his very endeavour to reduce thereto the argument _for_ it.
“’Tis as much as to say,” cries he with lofty scorn, “‘What pleases
excellent judges is good: what pleases all without distinction is
better.’” “Why, so it is, oh well-born Court-Counsellor and Professor at
Jena,” one may reply.[745]

[Sidenote: _The_ Xenien.]

As for the _Xenien_, I am afraid I am still more out of accord with
Schiller’s admirers here. The ill-nature of them is very suspicious when
we find that, in this collaboration, it communicated itself to Goethe,
who was certainly not ill-natured as a rule, though he was rather
selfish. But the ill-nature is not the worst part. This kind of thing,
whether it is done by a Pope, or by a Firm of Goethe, Schiller, &
Company, has some of the disgustfulness of pigeon-shooting or even
rabbit-coursing. There is hardly any real sport in it; the victims are
nearly always rather defenceless, and generally quite harmless: their
destruction does little, if any, good to anybody; and the spectacle is
demoralising.[746]

These _Xenien_, I confess, appear to me to be one of those superstitions
of literature which it is certainly the business of the critic, and the
historian of Criticism, to protest against and demolish if he can. I
never thought very much of them: and I think still less of them after a
very careful study for the purposes of this book.[747] They
corresponded, of course, in a certain sense, to the nearly contemporary,
but much less famous and, as far as their authors are concerned, much
less remarkable _battues_ of Rivarol and Gifford in France and England.
Goethe and Schiller were not only much more formidable sportsmen, but
had much better game—or worse vermin if anybody likes—for quarry. The
imperfections of German literature were, as they always have been, much
greater than those of French, and much more easily got at than those of
English. It is rather ridiculous, and more than rather disgusting, to
find even such men treating such others as Wieland and Jean Paul (Herder
himself seems only to have escaped because of his personal connection
with Weimar) as if they were “Tom Sternhold or Tom Shadwell.” But this
is not the worst of it. The _Xenien_ are not, as a rule or in any large
proportion, particularly _good_: and if they did not appeal to the
ill-nature of mankind, and had not great names attached to them, few
people would think them so. Schiller’s are often very lumbering verse
and phrase, regarded merely as phrase and verse: Goethe’s are less often
so, but seldom very brilliant as either.[748] If more people would read
them in comparison with Martial himself, their lameness and awkwardness
could hardly fail to be made clear. It would need a rather wider reading
(though I at least have as little doubt of the result) to show not
merely their pervading ill-nature and arrogance but their frequent
miss-fires.

[Sidenote: _The Correspondence with Goethe._]

Most fortunately, however, we are not left either in the cold with the
Æsthetic treatises, or in hot water with the Bürger review and the
_Xenien_. The _Letters of Schiller and Goethe_[749] are a twice-blest
book. Nowhere does one _like_ Goethe so much as in them: nowhere is it
possible to understand, and therefore to like, Schiller better than in
parts of them. It is true that the sense of his being fundamentally a
prig of genius remains—that even the sense of his having something of
that “bad blood,” of which Milton, Racine, and perhaps Wordsworth, are
the chief other examples among persons of genius of the Upper House,
remains likewise. But Goethe meets him with such an amiable
_camaraderie_, he softens his asperities with such a never offensive but
always effective blend of cordiality and irony, that, after the first
few letters, Schiller begins to talk almost like a man of this world,
and yet neither loses his predominant interest in literature. It is true
that when we come to the _Xenien_ the offence returns. It is not
pleasant to find two men of genius calmly plotting how to put, into the
smallest space and the neatest form, most envy, hatred, malice, and all
uncharitableness towards the greatest number of persons obnoxious to
them. And Schiller’s remarks on the necessity of “giving it hot” to a
certain unlucky Reichardt, who had had the impudence not merely to
praise the _Horen_ lukewarmly, but to praise the wrong things in them,
can only be matched with Macaulay in reference to Croker, while there is
much more deliberate malice in them. It is no excuse to say that severe
criticisms are sometimes necessary. The reviewer is a policeman who may
sometimes have to use his staff: the _Xenien_-writer is a bravo who
chooses the stiletto. But enough of that matter.

And, as has been said, the book as a whole is very interesting to us.
Schiller’s criticisms on _Meister_ never reach the concentrated justice
of Novalis (_v. inf._) But they are by no means without _parrhesia_: and
the picture they give us of the successive results of the instalments,
on an eagerly receptive and extraordinarily sensitive literary
wit-gauge, is not readily to be paralleled, except by the companion
remarks of Goethe on _Wallenstein_ later. And Goethe’s practised
_Weltweisheit_ deprives his observations of the naïve character which
Schiller always, for good or for bad, retains. The latter, however,
always retains likewise his porcupine attitude towards contemporary men
of letters who are not quite of “ours.” From Richter to Bouterwek he
cannot away with them in one sense, and would like to away with them
very much in the other. Where this disturbing element does not come in,
he is better; but seldom quite satisfactory. He was right not to think
much of Darwin, and not wrong to think something of Restif’s _Monsieur
Nicolas_: but this last, at least, has little to do with literature. His
Shakespeare criticisms are always informing from the ethical-æsthetic
side; they hardly even attempt the literary. But the elaborate character
of the Index to these letters, which exhibits all the literary judgments
of both the poets under separate reasoned catalogues, makes it almost
unnecessary to pursue our usual process of sampling, the task being done
to hand.

[Sidenote: _The_ Naïve and Sentimental Poetry.]

Of the definite critical treatises, by far the most important for our
purpose (the “Æsthetic Education” being omitted, on the showing of its
chief admirers, as of a more general bearing) is the tract on “Naïve and
Sentimental Poetry.” It has even been claimed for this, that here, for
the first time, is a distinction made out between ancient and modern
poets, on the score of their objective and subjective character
respectively. The distinction is not quite real, and it is not
critically made out. In support of the first demurrer (which is
something too wide for us here), let me request anybody who really knows
the Greek choruses, and especially those of Æschylus, to say whether, on
his soul and conscience, he can deny them “sentimentality” in the good
sense, subjectivity in any. Goethe and Browning will be hard put to it
to fight this prize against the choruses of the _Agamemnon_ alone. The
other point is more relevant. At the time[750] when Schiller wrote this
essay we know, from a subsequent letter of his[751] to Goethe, that he
had not read the _Poetics_; this is dangerous, but it is not fatal. What
is, as it seems to me, fatal is that nearly all his literary citations
are of a general and second-hand character. I can see nowhere any direct
evidence of “contact” with the texts. He knows Kant at first hand
certainly; he probably knows Lessing and Herder; he of course knows
Kleist and Wieland. But did he know, at first hand and in the originals,
besides the ancients, Shakespeare and Milton, Dante and Ariosto,
Rabelais and Molière? I cannot see much evidence of it.

In fact, though I know well to what danger I am, once more, exposing
myself, I must once more say that Schiller does not seem to me a great
critic, or even a good one. He was a man of letters who, as such,
possessed genius, and a philosopher who at least had a very great talent
for philosophy; and so much of a critic as can be made by these two
qualifications he was. To put it in other ways, and perhaps to go even a
little further, he was, as a merely _a priori_ critic, or a critic
furnished with such _a posteriori_ knowledge as can be supplied at
second-hand, very clever indeed. He could spin out of his interior more
criticism, and of a better quality, than most men could. But he was
excessively deficient in Love—that first and greatest fulfilling of the
law of the true critic: and, partly without his own fault (for, as is
well known, his life was short and not altogether favoured by fortune),
partly by it, he did not give himself, or was not given, sufficient
opportunity to warm his hands before that immortal fire of literature
which each generation keeps burning, to soften what is harsh, feed what
is starved, anoint and cheer and clean what is stiffened and saddened
and soiled in the nature of man. The best of life might yet have been
for him in criticism, as in other things: the _Versöhnung_, the time of
the “calmed and calming _mens adepta_,” might have come. But it did not
so please the Gods; and the most illogical form of playing Providence
perhaps, though not the most mischievous and impertinent, is to refuse
to accept the fact of what the Gods did _not_ choose to do.

[Sidenote: _Others: Bürger._]

Others of the greatest men of this Augustan period of German literature
were more or less given to criticism, while not deriving their chief
titles from it. Bürger himself was not at all contemptible in this
respect. His answer to Schiller[752] is not undignified, and a little
more of that wisdom of the serpent, which Molly’s adorer never
possessed, would have made it very damaging. As we have said, it was
Schiller’s ridicule of his theory of popularity that was ridiculous, not
the theory in itself: and several things worth attention will be found
in the two _Prefaces_ to his _Poems_, in his “Thoughts on translating
Homer,” and in his Prose Fragments. In these last, indeed, there are
some critical utterances of real weight on the extreme sensuous and
individualist side of theoretical Poetic. Bürger says boldly that “among
people to whom asafœtida gives a more charming scent than roses the poet
ought to celebrate asafœtida”; and I am bound to say I think he is
right.[753]

[Sidenote: _Richter._]

There is a note to the Preface of the second edition of Jean Paul’s[754]
_Vorschule der Æsthetik_ which expresses my own opinions on its subject
so completely that I must give it in full. “A collection of Wieland’s
reviews in the _Teutsche Merkur_, or, in short, any honest selection of
the best æsthetic reviews from newspapers and periodicals, would be a
better bargain for the artist than any newest _Æsthetic_. In every good
review there is, hidden or revealed, a good 'Æsthetic,' and, more than
that, an applied one, and a free, and the shortest of all, and (by dint
of the examples) the best.”

No one, of course, who has the slightest knowledge of Richter will
suppose that the whole book is written in such a straight-forward and
common-sense style as this. But it is very far indeed from being one of
his thorniest or most acrobatical: and Carlyle[755] need scarcely have
feared that it might “astonish many an honest brother of our craft were
he to read it, and altogether perplex and dash his maturest counsels if
he chanced to understand it.” Nobody who can understand the _Biographia
Litteraria_ could have the faintest difficulty with the _Vorschule_.

[Sidenote: _The_ Vorschule der Æsthetik.]

Such Richterisms as do appear are chiefly in the appendix lectures, the
“_Miserikordia_-Lecture for Stylists,” the “_Jubilate_-Lecture for
Poetical Persons,” and the “_Kantate_-Lecture on Poetical Poetry,”
which, nevertheless, do contain excellent things. In the main body of
the book there are only occasional flings (such as, “according to Kant,
the formation of the heavenly bodies is easier to deduce than the
formation of a caterpillar”), while the famous and very just description
of a certain thing as “like a lighthouse, high, shining, empty,” is mere
justice lighted up itself by wit. The fact is, that the book is one of
the best of its kind, and deserves to be reserved from that exclusion of
titular Æsthetics which prevails in this part of our History, not more
by the large intermixture of actual criticism in it than by the sanity,
combined with inspiration, of the rest. From its separation at the
beginning of the “Nihilists” of Poetry (those who generalise everything)
and the Materialists (who abide wholly in the sensuous) to the fragments
on Style and Language at the end, it is a really excellent book, and if
it has not been translated into English it ought to have been, and to
be.

[Sidenote: _The so-called “Romantic School.”_]

The German “Romantic School”[756] has been the occasion of divers solid
books[757] (and famous booklets) all to itself, and I do not consider it
necessary to say much about it generally here. In a certain justifiable
sense it may be said to have begun with Klopstock and only died, if it
died even then, with Heine, who, on a calculus to me, I own,
incomprehensible in any other sense than this, is thought by some to
have killed it. But its usual connotation in literary histories, a
connotation responsible, I think, for this and other errors, is that of
a period extending from the latest years of the eighteenth century over
about the first quarter (or the first thirty or forty years) of the
nineteenth, and dominated by a remarkable quartette of friends—the two
younger Schlegels, “Novalis,” and Tieck. The work of all the four is
saturated with literary criticism of the polemic and propagandist kind,
but it is rendered more troublesome to handle than it need be by the
pestilent habit (which the Germans took from Rousseau, and from Goethe
downwards indulged after the most intemperate fashion) of throwing
polemic and propagandist thought into the forms of prose romance.

[Sidenote: _Novalis._]

Of these four the _greatest_ critic is, in my humble judgment, Novalis—
though he wrote the least criticism. Indeed, there is a sense in which
one might, without absurdity, call Novalis the greatest critic of
Germany. He is, in fact, the Shelley of criticism; and it may be left to
the Devil’s Advocates to suggest that, like Shelley, he had time to
indicate, at least, all that was of truth in him, and had no time to
turn it into, or muddle it with, error. He, very much more than Jean
Paul, is _der Einzige_: though his uniqueness is such that, while it
does not adjust itself to all times or temperaments, it will, when once
apprehended, always re-present itself at some time or other with some
slight assistance of fortune.

It would hardly have assisted his critical position if he had carried
out the intention, which we are told[758] he entertained (under the
influence of the above-noted delusion, as to the suitableness of the
Romance for such purposes), of writing seven documents of the kind, on
Poetry, Physics, the Civic Life, Commerce, History, Politics, and Love!
_Wilhelm Meister_, which (see below) he judged so well, would have had
much to answer for if this had been done. As it is, the existing but
unfinished _Heinrich von Ofterdingen_ represents the first of these, and
the not much more than begun _Lehrlinge zu Sais_ is believed to
represent the second: but the rest remained bodiless and in the gloom.
It was much better so: for neither the partly completed nor the hardly
begun book approaches in value the _Fragmente_ which follow. In fact,
even if the scheme were really practicable (which, despite certain
imposing instances, may be very much doubted), it is pretty clear that
Friedrich von Hardenberg was not the man for it.

[Sidenote: _The_ Heinrich.]

It can hardly, on the other hand, rejoice any reader of _Heinrich von
Ofterdingen_, whether he be philosopher, critic, or simple reader for
reading’s sake, when the Quest of the Blue Flower, and all the other
agreeable Fouqué-like “swarmeries,” are interrupted by a discourse of
three pages from the poet Klingsohr on the _Überschwenglichkeit_ of
certain subjects for poetry. Even if you are a poet, and a
Middle-High-German, and the father of Matilda, you must not talk like
that in a novel. And your poetry, and your Middle-High-Germanship, and
your fatherhood of Matilda are very distinctly _überschwenglich_ for you
in your character as a critic. From Heinrich, therefore, we shall
chiefly get (though there are tempting _aperçus_ in it here and there) a
somewhat vague notion of the _clair-de-lune_ Poetic of the central
Romantic school. [Sidenote: _The earlier_ Fragments.] The _Disciples at
Sais_ hardly concern us. But the _Fragments_ that remain give much less
unsubstantial food. Here is that witty and appallingly accurate judgment
of Klopstock, which applies to a whole class of poets as well, that “His
works appear to be, for the most part, free translations and workings up
of an unknown Poet by a very talented but unpoetical philologist.” Here,
too, is that remarkable judgment of Goethe’s work in general, and of
_Wilhelm Meister_ in particular, of which Carlyle bravely gave the
gist,[759] though it certainly did not coincide with his own opinion,
and which remains almost a pattern of independent and solid judgment,
unspoilt by any petulance or jealousy of youth, from a young man of
letters on the living leader of his country’s literature. Here also are
some almost equally remarkable things on Shakespeare, not quite showing
the _adequacy_[760] of those on Goethe, but very acute and especially
valuable because they enter a protest against the exaggeration—a
reaction, of course, from the opposite exaggeration of Voltaire & Co.—of
Shakespeare’s deliberate artistry. And these individual judgments occur
side by side, in the æsthetic and literary division of these
_Fragments_, with more general dicta of astonishing profundity and
beauty.

The most pregnant of all the sayings, as it seems to me, though the
æstheticians may not like it, is this,[761] “Æsthetic is absolutely
independent of Poetry”; and I should pair with it the other,[762] “May
not poetry be nothing but _inner_ painting and music, freely modified by
the nature of [the individual’s?] feeling (Gemüth)?” The further
Shakespearian remarks[763] on the blending of contradictories in our
poet, with the remarkable approximation of his style to Boccaccio’s and
Cervantes’ prose, as “gründlich, elegant, nett, _pedantisch_ und
vollständig,” may puzzle some people, but they do not puzzle me. What a
critical genius must a German have had who, about 1800 and before he
himself was thirty, combined[764] with the above-cited judgments of
Klopstock and Goethe, recognition of the facts that Wieland and Richter
sin from formlessness, and from having “not æsthetic or comic _spirit_,
but only æsthetic or comic _moods_,” _and_ that Schiller “starts from
too definite a point, and draws in too sharp and hard an outline.” “Man
ist allein mit allem was man liebt”[765] may be said, by any one who
likes, to be mere “dropping into poetry” in feeling as in form. Again:
it is not so to me. And the postil[766] on a highly aggressive text,
“Die Welt muss _romanticisirt_ werden,” is not so aggressive as it
looks.

[Sidenote: _The later._]

I am, however, inclined to think that there is still further improvement
in the fragments and thoughts of the _third_ volume. This was not
published till nearly twenty years after Carlyle wrote the Essay by
which, in all probability, most Englishmen know Novalis. But I should
venture to recommend, to any one who wishes to understand him, the
reading of it both first and last. The biographical article, written
many years before by his old friend and chief, Just, gives, I think, a
fuller and truer notion of the man than Tieck’s _Vorrede_ in the first
collection. The Diaries, Letters, and oddments of various kinds help to
fill out this portrait, and the _Fragmente_, themselves, from p. 160
onward, contain most admirable things. This third volume, in fact, forms
a much earlier pendant to Amiel’s _Journal_, with, as some people may be
excused for thinking, much less _Katzenjammer_, a much manlier tone, and
far more positive genius.

How much more critical and more informing is the confession[767] that
“Shakespeare is darker to him than Greece”—that he is more at home with
Aristophanes’ jokes than with Shakespeare’s—not merely than the old
abuse, but than certain kinds of laudation! What a combination (on a par
with the sentence on Klopstock, elsewhere cited) of _giustizia_,
_potestate_, _sapienzia_, _e amore_ (not a bad definition, by the way,
if I may dare to borrow it, of the qualifications of the critic) is
there in the saying[768] that Goethe is “der wahre _Statthalter_ des
Poetischen Geistes auf Erden”! The words—idle paradox as they may seem
to some—“Moments may occur when A B C books and Compendia seem to us
poetical,”[769] are a better text for a whole æsthetic—or, at least, for
a whole theory of real criticism—than _oratio sensitiva perfecta_ or any
of its clan. So is this:[770] “By industrious and intelligent study of
the classics of the Ancients, there arises for us a classical literature
which the Ancients themselves had not.” How just the observation[771]
that “Lessing saw too clearly: and so missed the feeling of the
_undefined_ Whole”!

[Sidenote: _His critical magic._]

These are but specimens. But I shall venture to say of them that for
awaking the critical power, and qualifying the critical taste where it
exists—as examples of that critical unity of subject and object which
has been so often spoken of—they are specimens of some significance.
There is only one other person who can, I think, be yoked with Friedrich
von Hardenberg. If you want critical system, range of actual critical
examination, and the like, you must go elsewhere. But for critical
_magic_—for the critical “Open sesame!”—go to the two contemporaries,
Novalis and Joubert.

[Sidenote: _Tieck._]

Tieck, at one time very famous as a critic, and not undeservedly so,
need occupy us less than his friends: for he has less intensity than
Novalis, and less extension than the Schlegels. Survey of his critical
work may, therefore, with advantage be confined to the actual collection
of his _Kritische Schriften_,[772] which he issued in his last years:
for the _Nachgelassene Schriften_,[773] the two thin volumes of which
appeared after his death, contain only an eristic or apologetic piece,
“Über Parteilichkeit, Dummheit, und Bosheit”—an “_un_hübsches Lied”
which we all feel inclined to sing now and then—and some fragments and
sketches for his great projected Shakespeare-book. It need hardly be
said that Tieck occupies a very important position in the succession of
German Shakespeare critics, or that some of the most interesting of his
criticisms belong to the subject. Three out of the four earliest
articles of the _Kritische Schriften_, all dated before 1800, concern
the Master—the first being a perhaps excusably ill-tempered one on the
engravings of the too famous Shakespeare Gallery; the second, the really
valuable discussion of his “Handling of the Marvellous”; and the third,
“Letters” on him. Tieck, as is again matter of common knowledge, was an
early student of the Pre-Shakespearian drama, dealing with it at
intervals in 1811, 1823, and 1828. His criticism is generally
appreciative: but his textual suggestions are not always fortunate.[774]

As an example of what may be called the Romantic _potpourri_, Tieck’s
work is very interesting and symptomatic. It ranges from Early German
drama through Kleist to Goethe at home, and from Espinel to the history
of the _Novella_ abroad. It is all sensitive, appreciative, catholic;
and there is a remarkably sound sense of Literary History (which it must
be remembered was still in its infancy) in an article on “Criticism and
German Bookishness” (_Buchwesen_). On the whole, however, that
subordinate position, from the historical point of view, which I have
assigned to him, in comparison with the other members of the quartette,
seems to me not unjustifiable.

[Sidenote: _The Schlegels._]

There are not many better known names in the History of Criticism than
those of the (younger) Schlegels. They may even be said to be, in a
vague and general manner, more associated with the idea of “Romantic”
criticism than any other persons: and the question of the exact
relationship of both to Coleridge, or of Coleridge to them, is one of
those which seem to have more power than anything else to conciliate the
attention to critical persons, though, as has been confessed repeatedly,
the attraction is rather repulsive to the present writer. Of their
influence on Madame de Staël—who at least served as a most influential
vulgariser of the new critical ideas in Europe—there is no question at
all: the later critical Corinne is mainly, if not merely, as much
Schlegel as could go clothed in French petticoats, and remember itself
there. Those who adopt the common, but to my thinking quite erroneous,
idea that Romanticism began to wane towards the middle of the nineteenth
century, or even earlier, probably mean Schlegelian Romanticism, and are
so, perhaps, not quite wrong. In any case, the name, if shadowy and in a
sense antiquated, is still imposing, if only as having once
imposed.[775]

[Sidenote: _Their general position and drift._]

The work of the Schlegels generally—for not a little of it was done in
common, and almost all expresses a common tendency—may be described as a
continuation of that of Herder, with a still more definitely literary
intent, and with what may be called a _complexion_ to that intent which
was most definite of all. Criticism in Germany had been a long time
focussing itself, and it may perhaps even be questioned whether the
period of actual focus which it had now reached lasted very long; but
for a time it did last. The somewhat wool-gathering and tentative
efforts of Bodmer and his school had started the movement: and those of
Gottsched, with, in a less utterly perverse direction, those of the
half-French school—of whom Wieland is the representative, “too good for
such a breed”—had wholly failed to divert it; the keen-edged strength of
Lessing had given it movement and penetration; the immense literary
excursions of Herder and others had opened up the widest fields to it.
Nay, the Æsthetics, from Baumgarten to Schiller, with the imminent or
accomplished transcendence of their transcendentalism in the minds, if
not yet on the pens, of such men as Fichte and Hegel, had in a dangerous
balloon-like fashion given new motive and vehicle; and the amiable if
excessive Chauvinism of those about Klopstock had its good side
likewise. If the extraordinary critical insight and sureness of hand
which we have seen in the fragments of Novalis could have been allowed
to preside over the concentration of all these, and had taken into
partnership the practical wisdom of Goethe, and the exact scholarship of
the great German school of philologists from Reiske downwards, there is
no knowing how great the things done in consequence might have been. As
it was, these two friends of Novalis were not quite equal to so mighty a
task: but they did what they could, and it was a good deal.

[Sidenote: _The_ Characteristiken.]

On the whole, Carlyle, I think, showed a right _flair_, due not merely
to the fact that he had probably made his own first acquaintance with
them in it, by selecting the _Characteristiken_[776] as more than
titularly characteristic. No matter what article we take, or which
brother, the eulogies of Lessing and of Meister, or the apology for
Bürger, the “Romeo and Juliet,” an admirable thing in all but its
title,[777] or the capital “Letters on Poetry” (in which A. W.,
unhampered by the connection with a heretic on the subject which
afterwards hampered Coleridge, puts the indissolubility of the marriage
between metre and poetry with the greatest force), the “Bluebeard and
Puss in Boots,” or the “Don Quixote,” there is noticeable, in all, the
peculiar modern blend of criticism—moral, æsthetic, verbal, and purely
literary—compounded and applied with the utmost freshness, vigour, and
skill. I do not know that they ever did better work, though, no doubt,
there is observable, here as elsewhere, the great fault of Romantic
criticism generally—that the critic is, so to say, too much at the mercy
of the last speaker. The actual goose, on pool or grass, is always not
only a swan, but _the_ swan. Shakespeare and Calderon, Indian Literature
and Chamfort, rule the roost so absolutely and exclusively for the time
that one has twinges and qualms of doubt as to the legitimacy of the
kinghood of any one of them.

[Sidenote: _A. W.: the_ Kritische Schriften _of_ 1828.]

But henceforward we may separate the brothers for a moment and take the
elder first. His _Kritische Schriften_, mentioned in the note above,
have the advantage, which it is nearly impossible to exaggerate, of
containing not merely reviews and critical writings of different
periods, but also later annotations on the earlier ones.[778] There can
be no better test of a man’s critical quality than this: and Schlegel
comes out of it very well, though the result no doubt does not place him
quite as high as his friend Corinne and some others would do. The two
best examples are the long and early review of Voss’s Homer,[779] and
that (later but still early) of Bürger’s _Poems_. There is perhaps a
slightly excessive patriotism in the author’s contention that German is
better suited than any other language for the purpose of translating
Homer; one is almost tempted to echo Garrick to Goldsmith: “Come, come!
you are perhaps the worst ... eh, eh?” in certain respects, though no
doubt not in all. Yet even here there is force as well as ingenuity in
the contention that the very fact of Germany possessing no large amount
of great literature at the time prevented German phrase from being
hackneyed in, and, as it were, _ascript_ to, certain contexts and
associations, as was the case with Italian, French, and even English,
while the enormous and unquestioned xenomania with which the Germans had
for generations been refreshing and stocking their speech and their
culture was another advantage.[Sidenote: _On Voss._] There is, moreover,
too much distinct animus against Pope as a coryphæus of the English
Neo-classics; but this itself marks Schlegel’s attitude, which, let it
be remembered, was fresh and novel. Nor is it surprising that, as the
author tells us with pride, both Goethe and Schiller, personages not
always well disposed to him, warmly approved the metrical part of the
essay. It is now pretty generally admitted, both that Schlegel was a
very sound critic on this all-important subject, and that the importance
of it was almost greater in Germany than elsewhere owing to the extreme
laxity and cacophony, descending at times nearly to the level of the
horse-fiddle, in which men not merely like Klopstock but like Bürger had
indulged. And the whole is one of the first examples I know of a full
modern review of the best kind, neither “puff” nor “slate” (though there
is a good deal of severe criticism in it), neither mere _compte-rendu_
nor mere divagation from the subject into some general discussion which
happens to interest the reviewer.

[Sidenote: _On Bürger._]

The Bürger article[780] has the additional interest of being an answer,
and a crushing one, to a precedent criticism. I have said[781] something
earlier of Schiller’s unlucky production, and need not return to it: but
it may fairly be observed that this is as good an instance of obedience
to literary morality as that was of offence against it. Bürger had been
a friend of Schlegel’s, and he was one of the poetical protagonists of
the cause for which Schlegel himself was fighting. Yet there is no
unfair praise here: and, what is more, there is no abstinence from just
censure. Indeed Schlegel may be thought to be even a little too hard on
the unlucky _Lenardo und Blandine_, though this piece has nearly all the
faults of “Monk” Lewis and other imitators.

If, however, these and other pieces of themselves place Schlegel in a
high position as a critic, the volumes do not fail to show his
shortcomings. The system of self-annotation, though possessing some
advantages, is dangerous, as giving opportunity for those egotistical
displays of which Schlegel has been commonly accused: but this does not
matter so very much. [Sidenote: _The_ Urtheile, _&c._] The batch of
_Urtheile_, _Gedanken_, &c., which closes the first volume, and which
originally appeared in the _Athenæum_ (the periodical which the two
brothers had founded in 1798, the very year of the _Lyrical
Ballads_[782]), do not raise our opinion of Schlegel’s talent, and they
certainly do not, as do the corresponding _Fragments_ of Novalis, give
us any idea of critical genius. The one exception[783] is not at all
like the others, and _is_ very like Novalis himself. But even this is
rather an amusing and well-aimed “fling” than a real critical plummet
suddenly let down to the bottom of the well of critical Truth. The rest
are quite ordinary and commonplace things, by no means unrespectable but
nothing more. Now, no one is bound to isolate his critical judgments and
set them up in specimen-cases for examination after this fashion. But if
he does so, they should be something more than commonplace, and
ordinary, and respectable.[784]

[Sidenote: _The_ Vorlesungen über Dramatische Kunst und Literatur.]

There is no doubt that Schlegel’s best-known work is, as sometimes,
though not always, happens, his best, and by a very long way. The
_Lectures on Dramatic Art and Literature_, which he delivered at Vienna
in 1808, printed next year, and issued finally in book form three years
later, undoubtedly deserve a place, not merely in any library of
critical literature, but on any shelf devoted to criticism which will
hold, say, a score of volumes. They have indeed faults, and grave ones.
The attitude towards French Drama, and especially towards Corneille and
Molière, does not sin merely by an excess of party spirit. There would
be some excuse for that, especially in face of the absolutely ridiculous
over-valuation of themselves by the French, who had held the critical
ear of Europe for a hundred and fifty years. Moreover, as has been, I
think, hinted more than once here, there are worse things than
thorough-going advocacy, prosecuting as well as defending, in criticism,
provided only that it observes literary manners and literary morals,
that it is well informed, and that it is intelligent. Schlegel is not
exactly guilty under the first count, but he is under the two last. He
ought to have seen that Corneille is really a Romantic Samson in the
mill of the classical Gaza. And as to Molière the case is even worse.
Further, to confine ourselves to really large and important matters, the
complete omission of the mediæval drama in the earlier part of the book,
where we stride straight from Seneca to the Renaissance, and the very
inadequate treatment of it later, form a really serious draw-back. I
have myself little doubt that the almost incomprehensible blunder of
those who deny the influence of this mediæval drama on our Elizabethans,
is in some cases due to the blunderers having taken their notions on the
subject from Schlegel. And it would be extremely easy to pick out a
small number of great errors, and a great number of small ones, to
supplement these two.

[Sidenote: _Their initial and other merit._]

Yet they are but little to be considered—they are certainly not to be
considered as at all fatal—in face of the merits of the book. To me the
greatest of all these is contained in its very first page, where the
whole question of the kinds, or parts, or phases of criticism, and of
their relation to each other, is treated with a completeness and
sureness which I do not know where to find before, and which I wish I
had found oftener since. On the one hand, says Schlegel, there is the
general _History_ of Art—indispensable, but not always easy to
understand. On the other, there is the _Theory_ of Art in general, and
the arts in particular—extremely important to the philosopher, necessary
to some extent for the artist himself, but inadequate by itself. Between
these two, connecting them, completing them, making them fruitful, is
actual criticism—the comparison and judging of existing productions.
There is really little or nothing to add to this: and if no other line
of the book had ever been written, it would give Schlegel an abiding and
important place in our history. But the book itself, though necessarily
in other parts somewhat antiquated, though of the kind which has to be
done afresh for itself, if not by every generation yet by every century
or so, remains excellent and masterly—one of the best individual
summaries of the critical struggle for independence of the eighteenth
century, and by no means merely dead or exhausted after the end of the
nineteenth.

[Sidenote: _The Schlegelian position._]

We should draw from this book the idea that though Goethe’s contemptuous
dismissal of August von Schlegel (almost in his presence) as _kein
Mann_[785] is not borne out by it in the critical respect,—though the
accompanying compensation-prize of “learning and service” to literature
certainly _is_—there remains to be added, if in the favourable sense an
acknowledgment of the completeness, and value of his playing of his
part, and of the part itself, yet also a further limitation. We have
seen and acknowledged the truth throughout, though we have protested
against the common exaggeration of it, that “old critics are like old
moons.” Perhaps the Schlegels are the most eminent examples of this.
They did yeoman’s service in their own time and to their own country—
perhaps even at that time they did service to other countries, too, in
preaching and spreading the Romantic gospel. But they were diffusers and
popularisers, not origins: and they did not give to their diffusion and
popularisation quite that touch of pure literary genius which will save
anything and anybody. They thus rank rather with Addison among ourselves
than with Dryden or Johnson, though in thoroughness and width of
critical knowledge and practice they are ahead of all three. If I were
writing this History of Criticism in German, and for Germans, I should
give them much more space than I give them here, of course. But even if
I were a German, “writing on this German matter in the German tongue for
German men,” I should never put them on a level with Coleridge, any more
than I should with Aristotle or Longinus in one class of critics, with
Novalis or with Joubert in another.

[Sidenote: _The_ Vorlesungen über Schöne Literatur und Kunst.]

The long unpublished Berlin _Lectures on Art and Belles Lettres_, in the
three first years of the nineteenth century, supply a document of A. W.
Schlegel’s criticism which is of the very greatest value. It is true
that they are “half-done work”—in some cases bare notes for lectures, in
others detached pieces of them, in only a very few (which were
separately published) finished even as parts. But it would be very
unwise of a writer to put his readers, and very unbenevolent of readers
to put their author, in either of the two classes to whom “half-done
work” is taboo. In fact, the book is as much finished as not a few of
the contemporary documents for Coleridge: and its great bulk and very
extensive range promise well enough. Nor is the performance to be evil
spoken of. Ambitious as is his scope, Schlegel nowhere shows that
shyness of detail which we shall have to notice in his brother: and his
width of knowledge, which would be unusual even at the present day, is
quite astounding when we remember that it was shown by a man of not much
over thirty a hundred years ago. The first volume, or course, deals with
Æsthetics generally, though from a peculiar point of view: and only a
few things in it need be noted, the most remarkable of which is
Schlegel’s scorn for Longinus on the one hand,[786] and on the other his
very ample acknowledgment of the dangers of Æsthetics themselves.[787]
The second deals with Ancient Literature (not without ample reference to
modern classics), and the third, which is in the least complete state,
with Modern Literature itself.

The Longinus passage just referred to is partly a corrupt following out
of the critic’s usual and very healthy distrust of such generalities as
“_The_ Sublime,” “_The_ Tender,” and the like; but it has a worse side
to it. As we have already seen, Schlegel is guilty of excess of party
spirit: and I have little doubt that, if Boileau and others of the
objects of eighteenth-century-worship had not expressed admiration for
the Περὶ Ὕψους, he would have judged it more wisely. In fact, his
judgments, which, either in the straight way of his courses or as
_obiter dicta_, are extremely numerous, are, though always interesting,
a curious mishmash of hit and miss, and the misses may be too generally
accounted for as the effects of that “trying to be different” which so
often besets young men of talent. The severity with which he treats
Burke[788] has some justification. But his handling of, for instance,
Opitz[789] is quite out of the right tone, and has all the faults that
beset the “company of warm young men.” Some of his English judgments—for
instance, those on Milton’s verse and on Thomson[790]—suggest, besides
this, an uncomfortable suspicion that his actual knowledge of our
language was not very perfect. In Greek he fails to respond quite
satisfactorily to the test of Æschylus. And in regard to a person very
different from Milton and from Æschylus, Ariosto, it is remarkable that,
where he praises him, he is doing it to disparage Wieland, and that in
the preserved heads of an intended fuller treatment he is most
unsatisfactory. No doubt much of this mere will-worship and
“will-blasphemy” (to invent a counter-word) would have disappeared in a
final redaction for press; but unfortunately it is there.

Fortunately there are also many better things, and on the whole the book
bears out, with evidence of a class peculiarly cogent, the praise which
has been given to Schlegel of being freer than any German critic from a
temptation to “speak off book,” to shirk and jilt the Book itself, for
expatiatory flirtations with so-called Ideas. He is in the main faithful
to Literature, and there is no higher praise.

[Sidenote: _Illustrated still more by Friedrich._]

Friedrich, though a very important person for us in general, has a good
deal less for us here, and has to a certain extent been already touched
and dealt with in the remarks on his brother. He seems very early to
have launched out into the expanse—I shall not here by any means say the
_inane_—of general literary outline and survey; and when he arranged his
collected works not so very long before his death,[791] he showed the
way in which he would himself have wished to have them regarded by
putting the _Geschichte der alten und neuen Literatur_[792] first,
though it was nothing like the first written; and by arranging after it,
in the position of fillings-up or developments, the studies on
Greek[793] and on Romantic[794] poetry, the book on Indian
Literature,[795] and the smaller critical pieces.[796] Of these smaller
pieces he reproduced but few, and the actual reviews or definite
criticisms which they contain are of slight importance.

In fact, “judging of books”, and even “judging of authors,” was not
Friedrich’s forte at all. The _Ancient and Modern Literature_ is from
some points of view a book more curious than entirely edifying. When we
find Greek literature dashed off in some sixty pages, which include a
great deal of preliminary and general matter; Roman in another sixty,
which have likewise to provide for Hebrew and Persian; five-and-thirty
doing duty for the rise of the Novel, all English _belles lettres_ from
Spenser to Milton, _and_ the Spanish and French dramas, it is surely not
carping to say “this is either too little or too much.”

Nor, when we turn to what we have called the “fillings,” do we find much
more satisfaction in some directions. Here Greek has something like
three volumes and seven or eight hundred pages to itself—and not a
volume or a page too much—as no one can add more heartily and
whole-souledly than the present writer. But even in this ample room or
verge we find that Schlegel blenches at the book—still more at the
passage and the phrase. What he likes to talk about is matter such as
the Pelasgians; as epic (specially Homeric) and lyric poetry in general;
as this and that “school”; as “The Artistic Worth of the Old Comedy” and
“The Presentation of Female Character in Greek”; as “The Connection and
Contrast of the Interesting and the Beautiful.” In presence of the
actual literary integer he seems like a shy person at a _tête-à-tête_,
though he is perfectly at home when he is addressing himself, _ex
cathedrâ_, on generals to a large audience. People of his kind are, in
their place and at their time, most useful: the Schlegels were really
born to burst up the old narrowness, to encourage catholic (Friedrich
does not seem to me to have been quite fairly charged with turning this
into _Roman_ Catholic) views: to cheer the student on to the discovery
and appropriation of the enormous and far-flung wealth which had been so
long neglected. Their doctrines were so widely diffused in the middle of
the nineteenth century that at the end thereof they came to be regarded
as truisms and almost “falsisms.” But their place is still honourable,
though it is a place rather in the museum of Criticism than in her
living-room of study.

We may conclude this chapter—since an exhaustive examination of the
German work of this period is here impossible, and, if it were possible,
would be of very little service—by noticing one or two authors and books
of different kinds, specimen-fashion.

[Sidenote: _Uhland._]

The best known in England of German lyric poets next to Bürger and
Goethe, and (in time) before Heine, Uhland, was a man forty years
younger than the author of _Lenore_, and did not die till Heine himself
was dead. But his most important work[797] in verse was done quite in
this period,[798] and one of his most important works in connection
with, if not strictly within, our subject, the excellent Essay on
“Walther von der Vogelweide,” appeared as early as 1822. Uhland’s
critical dealings with northern poetic literature are of no
inconsiderable bulk,[799] and they are very important for the history of
literary taste. Not merely in time, but in character, they stand between
the earlier, most creditable and stimulating, but often insufficiently
informed, and still more often too discursive and popular handlings, of
Herder and even the Schlegels, and the modern method of pure philology,
from which all literary appreciation is too often deliberately left out.
Uhland combines real scholarship, for his time and means, with poetical
and critical appreciation in almost the exactly desirable blend. Would
there were more such!

[Sidenote: _Schubarth._]

The work of Schubarth, _Zur Beurtheilung Goethe’s_,[800] may be worth a
short notice as an early and by no means contemptible example of a kind
of book which has been very largely written during the nineteenth
century, but which we can only here take by sample. A contemporary
cannot often have been handled earlier on so great a scale: for there
are some nine hundred pages in the second edition, and the author makes
the widest possible casts round his subject. He is not in the least
satisfied with the consideration of particular works (which he gives
mainly in two batches, on the earlier and the later respectively), or on
his author’s general literary characteristics. He has long excursus on
the personages, especially Mephistopheles. He can never refuse himself
what he modestly calls a “glance” (_Hinblick_), but what is generally a
very durable and substantial stare, at things that occur in passing,—
some criticisms of A. W. Schlegel’s, the literary contrasts of
Christianity and Heathenism, Lessing and the Education of the World, the
great succession of German philosophers from Kant to Schelling, the
Historical Method, Shakespeare, Poetry and Criticism in our day, the
Nibelungen Lied, the Devil in the Middle Ages, the Moral and the Immoral
in Art and Poetry. In short, the book is a sort of _Quodlibeta_—a
treatise upon “Goethe and Things in General.” We have seen many like it
since: let them appear here by it their foreman.

[Sidenote: _Solger._]

Solger’s _Vorlesungen_[801] are an early and good example of the defect
of Æsthetic from the standpoint of this book. He often says true things;
but they are generally not the whole or final truth, and they are almost
always too abstract. Thus, for instance: “Oft verwechselt man das
Interessante mit dem Schönen.”[802] The truth of this is constantly
exemplified both in life and in criticism; but, laid down too
isolatedly, it blinks the question whether, in certain degree, matter,
and circumstance, the Interesting _is_ not the Beautiful: and it has an
obvious and possibly dangerous connection with the very important
critical question of the “Unity of Interest.” So, too, distinctions of
Heavenly and Earthly Beauty are full of snares: and the danger of
generalisation perhaps reaches its highest in the dictum, “In Epic and
Lyric, matter is the important thing: in the Drama, form and the pure
activity of fancy.” One might almost make out “twenty-nine distinct
damnations” involved in this, with hardly more than a thirtieth and
single way of salvation and escape!

[Sidenote: _Periodicals, Histories, &c._]

To complete the notice of this remarkable division, which has, by
authorities respectable and more than respectable, been pronounced to be
the greatest of all, and which is certainly most important, something
should be said of the critical publications which, in Germany as
elsewhere, but almost earlier there than anywhere, played so important a
part, and of the immense industry in literary history which came to
supply perhaps the greatest of critical needs. Of the Translations,
which some would rank with these, I shall say nothing more than that
they seem to me to have been a great misfortune for Germany—encouraging
the tendency of the nation to keep aloof from the pure literary integer
of the book-as-it-is; assimilating the literature of other nations
insensibly but unduly to German ideals; and so making even the general
judgment of authors untrustworthy and unsound.

The Periodicals of this time are gradually shaking off the disguises and
mannerisms which the _Spectator_ had imposed upon those of our last
period. The most important of them, after Lessing’s _Dramaturgie_, are
the _Frankfurter Gelehrten-Anzeigen_ of Merck, Herder, and Goethe
(1772); the _Teutsche Merkur_ of Wieland, next year; the Berlin
_Monatschrift_ (1783); the _Jena Allgemeine Literatur-zeitung_ (1785);
Schiller’s _Horen_ (1795), and _Musenalmanach_, next year; the
Schlegels’ _Athenæum_ (1798). Of literary historians from Bouterwek to
Menzel, Schlosser,[803] and others, the list is almost too long to
attempt.




                              CHAPTER IV.

                    THE CHANGE IN THE OTHER NATIONS.


The present chapter could hardly be omitted; but it must be almost
necessarily rather an apology for what does not appear than a
substantive presentation. Something has been said already[804] of the
state of Italian and of Spanish criticism during the eighteenth century.
Its lethargy was only quickened after (and even some time after) the
beginning of the nineteenth, by the spread of those very waves of
influence which have been described, and their origin and progress
traced, partly in the last Book, and partly in the three preceding
chapters of the present. Neither country contributed anything original
to the critical change—to the establishment of Romanticism—though both
had much to do with that establishment as furnishing those texts of past
creation which were, as we have seen, almost the most powerful, and
certainly the most beneficent, of all agencies in the revolution. None,
perhaps, did so much by furnishing further scenery and apparatus to the
new movement: though Byron, by adopting these, enhanced their influence
in this way, yet it had been exercised long before he wrote—before he
even existed—in England, from the time of the _Castle of Otranto_, in
Germany, from one somewhat, but not so very much, later. But all this
belongs to the far-off fringes of our subject, if even to them; and we
have only too little room for its central and substantive portions.

The critical awakening of more backward and outlying nations and
languages, such as Russian, Polish, and Hungarian, was in much the same
case; that of the Scandinavian countries was a little more advanced. The
closer relations in which Denmark at all times stood with Germany, and
those which Sweden maintained, not merely with Germany but with France,
must have kept them more to the front in these matters, while the double
influence was of course still more constantly, though not quite so
effectually, at work in Holland. Holberg and Tullin and Ewald, with
Baggesen a little later in Denmark, rather accompanied than followed the
reconstructive reformation of German literature; Kellgren, Leopold, and
Thorn conducted the attack and defence in Sweden a little later still;
and the literary decadence of Dutch was at last relieved, towards the
end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century, by
Southey’s friend, Bilderdijk. In regard to all the languages referred to
in this paragraph, though not in regard to Italian and Spanish, I am in
the disability formerly acknowledged, as to one of them—Dutch. But I
cannot learn from any good authority that this disability is likely here
to be fatal, or even injurious. In the history of the individual
literatures their criticism is of course of great importance: but in the
history of the general subject it can have very little.[805]




                           INTERCHAPTER VIII.
              (WITH AN EXCURSUS ON PERIODICAL CRITICISM.)


We here come to the point antipolar to that of the last volume, at
which[806] we ventured to give a sketch of the Classic or Neo-classic
creed. The challenge to array definitions of Classicism and Romanticism
in a tabular form has already[807] been respectfully declined: but that
this “declinature” comes neither from pusillanimity, nor from
complacency in purblindness, may be best proved by undertaking the much
more perilous adventure of an anti-creed to that formerly laid down.
Even there we had to interpose the caution that absolute subscription,
on the part of all the critics concerned, ought not to be thought of:
but here the very essence and quiddity of the situation is that no such
agreement is in any way possible. In fact, no single and tolerably
homogeneous document could possibly here be drawn up, for there would be
minority (and sometimes majority) counter-reports on every article. Even
those who resist the extremer developments take large licenses upon the
old classical position. You have your Jeffrey expressing admiration of a
_Pharonnida_ which would have seemed to Dennis a monstrous
stumbling-block, and to Johnson mere foolishness: while among the
extremists themselves, each man is a law unto himself. Still, it is
perhaps possible to draw up some articles of the Modern or Romantic
Criticism which was reached during this period, and we have already, in
the last two books, described at some length the process by which they
were reached. These articles will be best separated into two batches,
the first representing the creed of centre and extremes at once, the
second that of extremes (left or right) only: and it will be well to
mark the difference from the former statement by giving the articles
separately, and not arranging them in paragraphs.

The more catholic creed is very mainly of a negative and protesting
character, and its articles might run somewhat thus:—

All periods of literature are to be studied, and all have lessons for
the critic. “Gothic ignorance” is an ignorant absurdity.

One period of literature cannot prescribe to another. Each has its own
laws; and if any general laws are to be put above these, they must be
such as will embrace them.

Rules are not to be multiplied without necessity: and such as may be
admitted must rather be extracted from the practice of good poets and
prose-writers than imposed upon it.

“Unity” is not itself uniform, but will vary according to the kind, and
sometimes within the kind, itself.

The Kind itself is not to be too rigidly constituted: and subvarieties
in it may constantly arise.

Literature is to be judged “by the event”: the presence of the fig will
disprove the presence of the thistle.

The object of literature is Delight; its soul is Imagination; its body
is Style.

A man should like what he does like:[808] and his likings are facts in
criticism for him.

To which the extremer men would add these, or some of them, or something
like them:—

Nothing depends upon the subject; all upon the treatment of the subject.

It is not necessary that a good poet or prose writer should be a good
man: though it is a pity that he should not be. And Literature is not
subject to the laws of Morality, though it is to those of Manners.[809]

Good Sense is a good thing, but may be too much regarded: and Nonsense
is not necessarily a bad one.

The appeals of the arts are interchangeable: Poetry can do as much with
sound as Music, as much with colour as Painting, and perhaps more than
either with both.

The first requisite of the critic is that he should be capable of
receiving Impressions: the second that he should be able to express and
impart them.

There cannot be Monstrous Beauty: the Beauty itself justifies and
regularises.

Once more it has to be stipulated that these articles are not to be
regarded as definitely proposed ends and aims, which the critical
practice of the period set before itself, and by which it worked. They
are, for the most part, piece-meal results and up-shots of a long and
desultory campaign, often reached as it were incidentally, “windfalls of
the Muses,” kingdoms found while the finder is seeking his father’s (or
anybody’s) asses. If anything general is to be detected before and
beneath them, it is a sort of general feeling of irksomeness at the
restraints of Neo-classicism—a revolt against its perpetual restrictions
and taboos.

To recur once more to those egregious _juvenilia_ of Addison’s, which,
though not to be too much pressed as stigmata on his own memory, are a
useful caricature of Neo-classicism in regard to English, some English
lover of literature feels that there is much more in Chaucer than vulgar
jests, now not even fashionably vulgar, and in Spenser than tiresome
preaching. He looks about to support his feeling with reasons, and he
“finds salvation” in the Romantic sense, more or less fully, more or
less systematically, more or less universally. The ways and manners of
the finding are very much the same in all countries, and have been dealt
with in the first Book of this volume; the results of it, in critical
form, have been set forth in that just finished, but may deserve some
summary and _rationale_ here.

In the remarkable group of English critics whom we have called “the
companions” of Coleridge, and in Coleridge himself, the contemporary
quality, and in some cases the direct suggestion, of that great critic
appear unmistakably, while in at least most cases they are free from the
chaotic or paralytic incompleteness which he hardly ever, save in the
_Biographia_, shook off. They all show, as he does, though in varying
degrees, the revolt or reaction from the hidebound failure of the baser
kind of Neo-classic to _appreciate_—the effort really to taste, to
enjoy, and so to deliver that judgment which without enjoyment is always
inadequate. And it would be unjust to regard them as merely the sports
and waifs of an irresistibly advancing tide. There _is_ something of
this in them,—the worst of the something being the uncritical scorn with
which they sometimes regarded even the greatest of the departed or
departing school—the astonishing injustice of Coleridge himself to
Gibbon, and Johnson, and the Queen Anne men; of many of them to Pope; of
Hazlitt even to Dryden. But they were not only carried, they swam,—swam
strongly and steadily and skilfully for the land that was ahead. Their
appreciation is not mere matter of fashion; it is genuine. They are
honestly appetent of the milk and honey of the newly opened land of
English literature for themselves, and generously eager to impart of it,
and of the taste for it, to others.

But we must not—for these merits, or even for what some may think the
still greater one of providing, for almost the first time in any
literature, a great bulk of matter which is at once valuable criticism
and delightful literature itself—make a refusal of our own critical duty
as to their shortcomings, which were neither few nor inconsiderable, and
which led directly to the sad and singular decadence of English
criticism in the middle third of the century. The first and the greatest
of these—let us fling it frankly and fairly to any partisan of the older
critical dispensation who “expects his evening prey” as our history
draws towards its close—was, or at any rate was a result of, the very
lawlessness and rulelessness by which they had effected their and our
emancipation. True, many of the rules that they threw off were bad and
irrational, most perhaps were inadequate, irrelevant, requiring to be
applied with all sorts of provisos and easements. But they had at any
rate kept criticism methodical, and tolerably certain in its utterances.
There had been a Creed; there had been not the slightest difficulty in
giving reasons, though they might be doubtful ones, for a faith which,
if incomplete and not really catholic, was at any rate formally
constituted. With the new men it was different. Coleridge indeed boasted
mediate and even higher rules and principles behind his individual
judgments. But with the rest it was rather a case of sheer private
judgment, of “meeting by yourself in your own house.”

Another drawback, dangerous always but intensified in danger by its
connection with the former, is that, while most of them were much less
intimately acquainted with the classics than the critics of former
generations had been, this deficiency was not generally compensated by
any of that extensive knowledge of _modern_ literature which the
ruleless or scantily ruled system of criticism imperatively requires.
Nay, they were all, including even Coleridge himself and De Quincey (the
two most learned, not only of these but of all English critics), very
imperfectly acquainted with _French_ literature—which, as a whole, is
the best suited to qualify the study of our own, correct it, and
preserve it from flaws and corruptions. Leigh Hunt knew little but
Italian; and in Italian knew best the things that are of least real
importance for the English student. As for Lamb, he was more than a fair
Latin scholar; but he seems to have known very little Greek, and not to
have had wide reading in the classics, either Greek or Latin, while he
betrays hardly the slightest knowledge of, or interest in, any foreign
modern literature whatever. Hazlitt’s case is worse still, for he
evidently knew very little indeed, either of the classics or of foreign
modern literature, except a few philosophic writers, here of next to no
use. In fact, one cannot help wondering how, knowing so little, he came
to judge so well—till the wonder nearly disappears, as we see how much
better he would have judged if he had known more. Wilson (to look
forward a little as we have done with De Quincey) had some classics: and
Lockhart had not only classics, but German and Spanish. But one suspects
the former to have known next to nothing of modern literature: and the
latter did not use critically that which he knew. Even as regards
English itself the knowledge of all these critics was very gappy and
scrappy. They did not, with all their advantages of time, know anything
like so much of early English literature (even putting Anglo-Saxon out
of the question) as Gray had known nearly a hundred years earlier, and
Mitford in their own early days.

Thus, while they had deliberately, and in the main wisely, discarded the
rules which at least were supposed deductively to govern _all_
literature, they had not furnished themselves with that comparative
knowledge of _different_ literatures, or at the very least of all the
different periods of one literature, which assists literary induction,
and to some extent supplies the place of the older Rules themselves.
They were therefore driven to judge by the inner light alone; and as,
fortunately, that inner light, in at least some of them, burnt with the
clearest and brightest flame, they judged very well by it. But their
system was a dangerous one when it came to be applied, as it inevitably
had to be applied, in the majority of cases, when their own torches went
out, by the aid of smoky farthing rush-lights in blurred horn lanterns.

Yet, allowing for these drawbacks of commission and of example in the
most illiberally liberal manner, there will yet remain to their credit
such a sum as hardly any other group[810] in any country—as none in ours
certainly—can claim. Here at last, and here almost for the first time,
appears that body of pure critical appreciation of the actual work of
literature for which we have been waiting so long, which we have missed
so sorely in ancient times, and which, in the earlier modern, has been
given to us stinted and, what is worse, adulterated, by arbitrary
restrictions and preoccupations. In Coleridge, in Hazlitt, in Lamb, in
Leigh Hunt even, to name no others, we have real “judging of authors,”
not—or at any rate not mainly—discussion of kinds, and attempts to lay
down principles. They are judges, not jurists, “lawmen,” not lawmongers
and potterers with codes. Appreciation and enjoyment, with their, in
this case necessary, consequences, the communication of enjoyment and
appreciation—these are the chief and principal things with them, and
these they never fail to provide.

The same merits and drawbacks, differently adjusted and conditioned,
appear in the French division of the subject. Perhaps there is nothing,
even in Sainte-Beuve, of the same consummate merit, from the point of
view of appreciation, as the best things of Hazlitt and Lamb: and I do
not think there are any critical generalities, either in Sainte-Beuve or
in any other, that quite approach the best things of Coleridge. The
length and the bitterness of the Classic-Romantic quarrel threw some
French critics into a mood of partisanship too extreme to be quite
judicial: but on the other hand it gave us that admirably trenchant
profession and confession of the faith that “nothing depends on the
subject” which we have dealt with from Victor Hugo, and other things
from other men. And, moreover, the interest excited by this quarrel,
coming to reinforce the general French spirit of system, order, and
artistic adequacy, brought about that high general level in the new
appreciative criticism which attracted the admiration of Mr Arnold and
others, and which certainly for a time (_cir._ 1830-1860) was much above
the level of English. Numerous as are the writers whom I have discussed
in the chapter on this subject, I feel half ashamed of not having
included more, and could easily do so. But it is almost enough to say
that, in accordance with that gregarious or scholastic spirit which has
always characterised Frenchmen, the merits which have been so fully
displayed in Sainte-Beuve are visible more or less in almost all his
fellows.

There is no doubt that these merits were to some extent (as Sainte-Beuve
himself allowed with equal judgment and generosity) transmitted or
inherited from the Empire critics, especially Chateaubriand and, in a
different way and lower sense, Villemain: while the whole secret of the
method had been revealed, or concealed, in and by the “fuliginous
flashes” of Diderot long before. But this sudden and enormous
development of it is still rather wonderful. It cannot be put down
merely to Sainte-Beuve, though Sainte-Beuve was its most eminent
representative; for, as we have seen, he did not himself reach his
perfection at once, or for a very long time, and critical results as
good as, or better than, his own _at the time_ had been produced by
others earlier. It was a case of a plenteous and great vintage, with one
growth improving beyond the rest. To this day it is impossible to read
over again, well as one may have known it, any of the better critical
work of France in this period without astonishment at its varied and yet
even excellence. But, as has just been said, it is not always, even in
its highest examples, of the _very_ highest: and perhaps at no time is
what we have so often called “grasp” a characteristic of it. It would be
absurd to call it superficial: yet, if it has a tendency towards
something not of the best, that tendency is towards superficiality.

Further, the French, though largely influenced by foreign nations and
literatures at this period, hardly shine so much as some others do in
criticism of those literatures. But, in reference to their own, they
exemplify the new process of “judging by the result,” and setting forth
that result, with attractiveness rivalled by hardly any, and with
facility and craftsmanship rivalled perhaps by none. From the elaborate
process of Sainte-Beuve to the impressionism of Gautier, and from the
strong meat and drink of Nisard to the froth of Janin, whatever is
provided is provided so as to give the user and consumer the least
fatigue and the most delectation. The severer critics are not pedantic,
and the lighter ones are seldom merely frivolous or horse-playful.
Occasionally, as in Nisard’s case again, there is a solidly constructed,
if not quite a solidly based, system: occasionally, as with Planche,
there are serious, if disputable, philosophical starting-points. In
Sainte-Beuve himself there is perhaps the greatest and most orderly
accumulation of positive knowledge, never of the “marine store” kind,
that any critic has brought together. But these dignified things never
take leave of the Graces: and even the lightest armed of the army—even
Janin and those about Janin—seldom write with the appalling absence of
knowledge and of method to which we are only too well accustomed in the
critics of some other countries.

The part played by Germany in this process was, of course, of the utmost
importance, and it is by no means out of a pusillanimous desire to
disarm the indignation or the contempt invited by some things already
written that I repeat and emphasise this acknowledgment. Germans (taking
their Swiss brethren with them) were among the very first to move the
stagnant waters. They were among the most—they _were_ the most—
industrious engineers in continuing the process—in clearing out the
water-courses and turning the new streams into them. It is impossible to
exaggerate their merits in putting at the service of criticism the
massive and acute intellect of Lessing, to substitute a new Preceptism
for the old: the wide range and towering literary faculty of Goethe, to
extend and popularise the new methods: the attractive and contagious
alacrity of the Schlegels in overrunning the provinces and the empires
of literature. But in the highest and purest work of criticism, as we
here define it, even these their greatest are sometimes strangely
wanting: and others are wanting less strangely but more disastrously. As
a rule, the German is far _too_ scientific (the epithet of praise
usually selected for him and by him) in his criticism. He has curiosity,
but not passionate or intimate enjoyment; intelligence, but not
enthusiasm; industry, but little (and hardly at all subtle) intuition.
He only gets out of the pupillary state—if he ever does so—to get into
the pedagogic. And it is difficult to say which of these is the more
unfavourable to true critical accomplishment.

We may, however, be justly asked, in this place or in that, to face that
view of German criticism which Carlyle was the first to put in England
by a famous (and indeed very admirable) “State of German
Literature,”[811] and which, with some modifications, was maintained and
enforced later by Mr Arnold, who did not like Carlyle. The eulogium is
well known, and it is a magnificent one. The Germans are [1827]
distinctly and considerably in advance of other nations in Criticism.
They have “raised it to a higher power,” in fact: though he does not, I
think, use the phrase. They neither, in the old way, discuss diction,
figures, logical value, &c., nor, as is usual with the best of our own
critics at present, discover and debate the particular nature of the
poet from his poetry: but, subordinating these two, attack the essence
and peculiar life of the poetry itself. “How did Shakespeare organise
his dramas?” they ask. “What unmixed reality is bodied forth in them?”
&c. Then, too, how do they proceed? Not by gorgeous mystic
phraseology[812] and vague declamation? No: by “rigorous scientific
inquiry,” of which much is said, the illustration and the enforcement at
once being drawn from Schiller on “Æsthetic Education,” and Fichte on
the “Nature of the Scholar.”[813]

This abstract is designedly cut short, not out of unfairness, but
because the original is known to many and accessible easily to all. It
is a high encomium: and even the contents of this book will show that it
is, beyond controversy, in part at least a deserved one. From Lessing
onwards there can be no question of the intent of the Germans to bring
about a complete critical Reformation: nor can it be denied that, after
a time, and to no small extent in consequence of their efforts,
something like a complete critical Reformation was brought about. But
whether there is not an indispensable nexus wanting somewhere—whether
the general improvement of actual criticism in Germany and elsewhere,
though not perhaps more in Germany than elsewhere, is a consequence of
the endeavour to consider the essence of Poetry and frame theories of
it—that is the question. It would be fatuous to say that I have shown,
but I have at least endeavoured to show, some cause against the
affirmative answer. In particular, I should like to re-invite the
reader’s attention to that _aporia_ which has been stated earlier—
whether the famous criticism of _Hamlet_ in _Wilhelm Meister_ (to which
Carlyle, of course, appeals here) might not have been written without
any knowledge of the original, of its language, and of its form—in
short, on a German prose translation of Shakespeare? If anybody is bold
enough to say “Yes: and so much the better,” well and good. But in that
case his idea of the essence of poetry and mine are so different that I
must necessarily seem a Completed Bungler to him, and that he must
necessarily seem to me (let us say) a Person to be Sincerely
Commiserated.

In actual “judging of authors” I have endeavoured to collect some facts
showing that the Germans did not attain to any remarkable
proficiency[814] by the application of their new systems of Æsthetic—in
regard to which, by the way, no two authorities agreed among them, and
of which, as a whole, some great authorities among them used language
not much more respectful than my own. And so, far from this “scientific”
criticism having any effect in the _production_ of great poetry or of
great literature, it is a notorious fact that since Heine—who was a
hopeless rebel to the whole system—Germany has produced no great poet,
and very few great men of pure letters. While other countries, besides
producing in their unscientific way critics at least not less great (I
should of course myself say, much greater) than Germany’s own, have
maintained the production of creative literature for the best part of a
century—for all but the whole of it.

And I have also endeavoured—if only by such hints and glances and
instances as are allowable on the plan of this book—to show _why_ the
Germans seem to me to have failed, if not exactly where they seemed to
Carlyle to have succeeded, yet in the same neighbourhood—how they have
generally either flown too high or grubbed too low, and so have failed
to gather the flowers and garner the fruit of the field of literature.
Very likely these opinions are quite unjust, but at any rate they are
not founded on ignorance; and he who holds them is perfectly ready to
fight for them at any time with the due arms and in the proper lists.

If, more shortly and in slightly altered form, I may once more put
my objection to German criticism, I can, as it happens, do so by
simply inserting a “not” in a German boast on this very subject.
Professor Schelling, of the University of Pennsylvania, in the
_Alumni-Register_[815] of that Institution, quotes these remarkable
words from Professor Lemcke of Marburg: “Let us for once lay aside
our proverbial modesty and openly declare that it is not the
affinity of race, nor the indications in his poetry of a German
spirit, which have brought us so close to Shakespeare, but it is
that God-given power, vouchsafed to us Germans before all other
nations, by the grace of which we are enabled to recognise true
genius, of whatever nation, better than other nations, ofttimes
better than its own, and better to enjoy and appreciate its gifts.”
Far be it from me to anticipate the obvious comments of different
kinds upon this utterance of Germanism _in cuerpo_, and with the
encumbrances of modesty laid aside. I shall only observe that it is
precisely this “God-given power” of recognition or appreciation
which German criticism seems to me to lack. It has the best
intentions; it takes the most enormous trouble; it accumulates the
most extensive and sometimes not the least valuable material and
plant for appreciation. But, except in the case of its very greatest
exponents, it does not seem to me often to _appreciate_.

But—French, or German, or English, with whatever diversity of immediate
aim, exact starting-point, felicity of method, and perfection of result—
all the dominant and representative criticism of this time tends in the
direction and obeys the impulse of some form or other of that general
creed which we have endeavoured to sketch earlier in this Interchapter,
and so contributes to the general progress (straight or circular, who
shall say?) of which this Book is the history. And when, rather, as
usual, by the influence of creative than of critical literature, and by
that of Scott and Byron above all, the same purpose was inspired in yet
other countries, the results were again the same. The dislike of Rule;
the almost instinctive falling back upon mediæval literature as an
alterative from classical and (recent) modern; the blending of the Arts;
the cultivation of colour- and sound-variety in poetry; the variegation
and rhythmical elaboration of prose,—in all these ways, by all these
agencies, literary Criticism as well as literary practice was
reconstructed. And the end is not even yet.

Some more general remarks on the sub-period must be postponed to the
several parts of the Conclusion. But there is one phenomenon which,
first appearing towards the end of the last volume, and much more
noticeable in the last Book, now becomes what the Germans call
_hervorragend_, persistently and almost aggressively prominent. And on
this we must say something.

[816]To enter into all the questions connected with the Periodical here,
would be obviously impossible. That it has multiplied criticism itself
is a truism; that it has necessarily multiplied bad criticism is
maintainable; the question is whether it has actually multiplied good. I
think it has. It is very difficult to conceive of any other system under
which a man like Sainte-Beuve—not of means, and not well adapted to any
profession—could have given his life practically to the service of our
Muse as he actually did. It is difficult to imagine any other which
would have equally well suited a man like Mr Arnold, with abundant, and
fairly harassing, avocations on the one hand, and with apparently no
great inclination to write elaborate books on the other. Many officials,
professional men, persons “avocated” (in the real sense) from criticism
by this or that vocation, have been enabled by the system to give us
things sometimes precious, and probably in most times not likely to have
been given at all under the book-and-pamphlet dispensation. Above all,
perhaps, the excuse of the surplusage which beset the regular treatise
has disappeared, while the blind (or too well-seeing) editor, with his
abhorred shears, is apt to lop excrescences off if they attempt to
appear.[817] Although there certainly has been more bad criticism
written in the nineteenth century than in any previous one,—probably
more than in all previous centuries put together,—it is quite certain
that no other period can show so much that is good. And the change which
has resulted in it was needed. The early _Bibliothecæ_ of the late
seventeenth century wanted pliancy, variety, combination of industrial
power: the later _Reviews_ were far too apt to be mere booksellers’
instruments, while their wretched pay kept many of the best hands from
them, and kept those who were driven to them in undue dependence. And
further, the increasing supply of actual literature _required_ more
criticism than could easily be had under the old system of few
periodicals, eked out by independent treatises and pamphlets.

These are not unimportant considerations, but they lie a little outside
of—or only touch—the question of the altered quality and increased or
decreased goodness of criticism as a whole and in itself. And when we
come to discuss this, the question assumes rather a different aspect.
The better pay, the increased repute, the greater independence, might be
thought likely to attract, and did attract, a better class of writers to
the work: but whether this better class was always better fitted for the
particular task itself one may sometimes doubt. And there can be no
doubt at all that the same attractions must necessarily tempt, and that
the increased demand must almost force, a very much larger supply of
inferior talent to the said task. Again, this increased demand, if not
for critics, for somebody who would undertake to criticise (which is not
quite the same thing), coincided with a gradual removal of the not very
severe requisitions of competence which had up to this time been imposed
upon the aspirant. The Mr Bludyer of the eighteenth century was at least
supposed to know his Aristotle and his Longinus, his Horace and his
Quintilian, his Boileau and his Le Bossu, his Dryden and his Addison. In
the majority of cases he did know them—after a fashion—though he
constantly misinterpreted the best of them and put his faith chiefly in
the worst. But the Mr Bludyer of the nineteenth has not been supposed to
know anything at all of the history and theory of his art. Now, when you
at once set up a Liberty Hall, and dispense good things therein freely
to all comers, your Liberty Hall is too likely before long to become a
Temple of Misrule.

As the older arrangements went to make the critic’s trade not merely
homely and slighted, but cramped by too many, too strict, and too little
comprehended rules and formulas, so the new tended rather to make it a
paradise of the ignoramus with a touch of impudence. It has never
perhaps been quite sufficiently comprehended, by what may be called the
laity, that though, in a sense, Blake was perfectly right in saying that
every man is a judge of art who is not connoisseured out of his senses,
yet it does not quite follow that every man, without training and
without reading, is qualified to _deliver judgment_, from the actual
bench, on so complicated and treacherous a work of art as a book. You
can take in at least great part of the beauty of a picture at the first
glance; and, no matter what the subject may be, many of the details,
with all the colour and some of the drawing and composition, require
neither previous education nor prolonged and attentive study, though
study and attention will no doubt greatly improve the comprehension and
enjoyment of them. In the case of a book it is very different. The most
rapid and industrious reader[818] will require some minutes—it may even
be some hours—to put himself in a position to deliver any trustworthy
judgment on it at all: and he must be an exceedingly well-informed one
who is at home with every subject treated in every volume that he has to
review. You have to find out what it is that the author has endeavoured
to do, and then—the most impossible of tasks to some critics, it would
seem—to consider whether he has done it, and not whether he has or has
not done something else which you wanted him to do. You have to guard
against prejudices innumerable, subtle, Hydra-headed,—prejudices
personal and political, prejudices social and religious, prejudices of
style and of temperament, prejudices arising from school, university,
country, almost every conceivable predicament of man. You must be able
first to grasp, then to take off a total impression, then to produce
that impression in a form suitable to the conveyance of it to the
public. One would not perhaps be quite prepared to assert that every one
of the hundreds and thousands who have, under the new dispensation,
undertaken the office of a critic, has been divinely endowed with these
gifts before undertaking that office, or that all of them, even if they
took the trouble to acquire what may be acquired, were likely to
succeed. There remains, of course, the comfortable doctrine that
“practice makes perfect”: or, as one of the most agreeable and acute of
modern political satirists, himself an admirable critic, has ironically
put it—

          “That by much engine-driving at intricate junctions
            One learns to drive engines along with the best.”

And if this seem small comfort to the suffering author, who thinks that
he has had too great a share of the bad criticism and too little of the
good—if it make him think of that inspiriting substitute in the
Secularist hymn for our old-fashioned Glorias—

               “The social system keep in view!
                 Good night! dear friends, good night!”—

there are two other consolations which may suit him according to his
temperament. The one is that under any other system his book would very
probably have received no notice at all, which would in some cases (not
in all) annoy him worse than blame. If he be of another sort, he may
perhaps anticipate the all-healing question to any _alma_ passably
_sdegnosa_, “Would you rather _not_ have written so, and be praised?”

One very necessary branch of the new criticism, as regarded poetry, the
average critic, whether in or out of periodicals, was sadly slow to
learn—indeed for the most part he recalcitrated furiously against
learning it. This was the proper appreciation of the new effects in
verbal painting and verbal music. There had always, of course, been much
of this in the great old masters: but there had not been _so_ much of
it, and the critic had been wont to treat it alternately in a peddling
and in a high-sniffing fashion.[819] On the musical side especially,
theory had chiefly confined itself to the remarks on “suiting the sound
to the sense,” in a comparatively infantine fashion—putting plenty of
_ss_'s into a line about a snake or a goose, and plenty of _r_'s into a
line about a dog; giving trisyllabic feet in a line that meant swift
movement, and clogging it with consonants when effort or tardiness came
in. The new poets—Coleridge, Keats, Tennyson,—in increasing degree,
changed this simple and rudimentary proceeding into a complicated
science of word-illumination and sound-accompaniment, which the new
critics perhaps could not see or hear, and at which they were by turns
loftily contemptuous and furiously angry. That there was some genuine
inability in the matter may appear from looking back to Johnson’s
well-known and very interesting surprise at Pope’s fondness for his
couplet—

            “Lo! where Mœotis sleeps, and hardly flows
            The freezing Tanais, through a waste of snows.”

This couplet _is_ beautiful, though the _homœoteleuton_ of “Mœot_is_”
and “Tana_is_” is a slight blemish on it. But its beauty arises from
such subtle things as the contrast of the metrical rapidity of “Tănăĭs”
and the sluggish progression of its waters, and from the extremely
artful disposition and variation of the vowel notes _o_, _a_, _ee_.

Even this is not _very_ complicated: and it occurs with Pope and his
clan once in a thousand or ten thousand lines. _The Ancient Mariner_ and
_Kubla Khan_ are simply compact of the colouring symphonies of sound:
and the palette becomes always more intricate, the tone-schemes more
various and more artful, as you journey from the _Eve of St Agnes_ to
the _Palace of Art_, and from the _Dream of Fair Women_ to _Rose Mary_.
In the _Palace_ especially[820] the series of descriptions of the
pictures pushes both these applications of the two sister arts towards—
almost to—the limits of the possible. Rossetti alone has since surpassed
them. Take, for instance, the cunning manipulation of the quatrain
stanza[821] itself to begin with; the figures and colour of the actual
designs; and the sound-accompaniment, to suit these figures and colours,
in such a stanza as—

             “One seemed all dark and red: a tract of sand,
               And some one pacing there alone,
             Who paced for ever in a glimmering land,
                 Lit with a low large moon.”[822]

Now the “values” of this are not really difficult to make out: they
can be thoroughly mastered for himself, without book or teacher, by an
intelligent boy of sixteen or seventeen, who, having a taste for
poetry, has read some—and who happens to have been born within the
nineteenth century. But they do need intelligent, sympathetic, and to
a certain extent submissive, co-operation on the part of the person
who is to enjoy them. The adjustment of the stanza, with its
successive lines of varying capacity and cadence; the fitness of those
lines themselves to receive and express more or less detailed images,
and add, as it were, not merely stroke after stroke, but plan after
plan, to the picture; the monosyllables; the alliteration of the last
line, and the crowning effect whereby the picture is lightened after
being displayed in shadow; the trisyllabic foot thrown in by
“glimmering,” whether you take it in the last or the last but one of
the third verse; the atmosphere-accompaniment,—all these things might
well be almost invisible and inaudible to a critic brought up on
eighteenth-century principles. And if he saw or heard them at all,
they might affect him with that singular impatience and disgust at
refinement and exquisiteness in pleasure which was affected by ancient
philosophers, and which seems to be really genuine in many excellent
Englishmen whom the Gods have not made in the very least
philosophical. I have never myself understood why it is godliness to
gulp and sin to savour; why, if a pleasure be harmless in itself, it
becomes harmful in being whetted, and varied, and enhanced by every
possible innocent agency. But there are doubtless some people who
think it a “poisoning of the dart too apt before to kill.” And there
are, I strongly suspect, a good many more whose senses are too blunt
to taste or feel the refinements, and who receive the attentions of
the poetic fairies with as little appreciation, though usually with by
no means as much good-humour, as Bottom showed to those of Titania and
her meyny.

This, however, is undoubtedly something of a digression, perhaps
something too much of it. But it illustrates the perils to which the new
reviewers were exposed, and at the same time (which is the excuse for
the divagation) the constant opportunity of salvation which reviewing
provides.

[Sidenote: _Saws and instances._]

Nor need much be said of the general quality of the articles in these
famous collections. Persons of enterprise have sometimes gone
“exploring,” like Mrs Elton (on or off their donkeys, and with or
without their little baskets), in this direction, and have come back
saying, more or less wisely, that the land is barren. Some of the more
practical of them have brought back specimens of its flora and fauna,
its soil and its rocks.[823] It is perhaps more profitable to digest
some of the general considerations which have already been stated or
indicated than to dwell on particulars. Not that these particulars are
useless or always uninteresting. It is good to know that _The Monthly
Review_, in an article which could not be called unfriendly, thought
_The Ancient Mariner_ “a rhapsody of unintelligible wildness and
incoherence” [the whole thing is as clear to _us_ as a proposition in
Euclid], with “poetic touches of an exquisite kind.” It is very
interesting, and not at all surprising (especially when we remember
Voltaire) to find the _Edinburgh_, the oracle of political Whiggery,
enunciating the doctrine of Poetical Divine Right in its article on
_Thalaba_.[824] It is interesting, again, and almost more instructive,
to find the _Quarterly_, in the article which did _not_ kill John Keats,
finding fault with that poet and his master Leigh Hunt, not (as might
have been done plausibly enough) for a flaccid _mollities_, for the
_delumbe_ and the _in labris natantia_,[825] but, of all things, for
“ruggedness.” If we have pursued our critical studies aright, we know
the symptoms, we know the diseases. They are all varieties of
_Kainophobia_,—the horror and the misunderstanding of the unaccustomed.

[Sidenote: _Their justification, such as it is._]

But though it is not original, it is very far from superfluous to point
out that these poor old unjust judges, these Doubters and Bloodmen of
the poetic Mansoul at this crisis of its history, were by no means
without their excuses. The original form of _The Ancient Mariner_ is
only less inferior to the later form which most people know now than
Tennyson’s Poems[826] as they appear in the editions since 1842 are
superior to themselves as they appeared to risk the knout of Wilson and
the thumbikins of Lockhart. Southey’s unrhymed _vers libres_ in
_Thalaba_ are, when all is said and done, a mistake: and their
arrangement is sometimes as unmusical as the least successful parts of
Mr Arnold’s followings of them. Exquisite as are the beauties,
intoxicating as is the atmosphere, of _Endymion_, no one nowadays could
pronounce it free from faults of taste of more kinds than one, or deny
that as, after all, it holds itself out to be a story, the demand for
some sort of intelligible narrative procession is not so irrelevant as
when it is put to a lyric, in even the widest sense of that word. And
the critics were, in every one of these cases, justified of their
victims. Coleridge and Tennyson altered into perfection the poems which
had been so imperfect. Southey added rhyme and better rhythm in
_Kehama_; Keats grew from the incoherence of _Endymion_, and its
uncertain taste, to the perfection of _Lamia_ and the great _Odes_ and
the _Eves_ of St Agnes and St Mark. “They also serve, who only stand
and—_whip_.” But it is better to have a soul above mere whipping.




                                BOOK IX

                      THE LATER NINETEENTH CENTURY

  “_En critique littéraire, les œuvres n’ont d’intérêt que par leur
  beauté et leur perfection._”—ÉMILE MONTÉGUT.

  “_Der Teufel hole alle Theorien!_”—GRILLPARZER.

                               CHAPTER I.

                    THE SUCCESSORS OF SAINTE-BEUVE.

“ORDONNANCE” OF THIS CHAPTER—PHILARÈTE CHASLES—BARBEY D’AURÉVILLY—ON
    HUGO—ON OTHERS—STRONG REDEEMING POINTS IN HIM—DOUDAN—INTEREST OF HIS
    GENERAL ATTITUDE, AND PARTICULAR UTTERANCES—RENAN—TAINE—HIS “CULPA”—
    HIS MISCELLANEOUS CRITICAL WORK—HIS ‘HISTOIRE DE LA LITTÉRATURE
    ANGLAISE’—ITS SHORTCOMINGS—INSTANCES OF THEM—MONTÉGUT: HIS
    PECULIARITIES—DELICACY AND RANGE OF HIS WORK—SCHERER: PECULIAR
    “MORAL” CHARACTER OF HIS CRITICISM—ITS CONSEQUENT LIMITATIONS—THE
    SOLID MERITS ACCOMPANYING THEM—SAINTE-BEUVE + GAUTIER—BANVILLE—
    SAINT-VICTOR—BAUDELAIRE—CRÉPET’S ‘LES POÈTES FRANÇAIS’—FLAUBERT: THE
    “SINGLE WORD”—“NATURALISM”—ZOLA—‘LE ROMAN EXPÉRIMENTAL’—EXAMPLES OF
    HIS CRITICISM—THE REASONS OF HIS CRITICAL INCOMPETENCY—“LES DEUX
    GONCOURT”—“SCIENTIFIC CRITICISM”: HENNEQUIN—“COMPARATIVE
    LITERATURE”: TEXTE—ACADEMIC CRITICISM: GASTON PARIS—CARO,
    TAILLANDIER, ETC.—THE “LIGHT HORSEMEN”: JANIN—PONTMARTIN—VEUILLOT—
    NOT SO BLACK AS, ETC.—THE PRESENT.


[Sidenote: Ordonnance _of this chapter_.]

It may be barely worth while to repeat the caution given above—that
“successors” in the title of this chapter is not to be taken too
literally; though, in fact, “Beware of the _Letter_” would be the best
possible continuous heading for every page of every History of
Literature or of Criticism. Construed, however, with some elasticity,
the term has more than enough truth in it. Some of Sainte-Beuve’s
elders, most of his contemporaries, practically all his juniors, felt
the influence of the flood of criticism that welled, gently but
irresistibly, from the fountainheads of the _Causeries_ and their
companion- or forerunner-volumes. Indeed, Taine—the most influential
critic purely of the second half of the century in France—is only
Sainte-Beuve methodised and formulated. Before him, we shall deal with
three interesting individualities belonging to each of the groups just
indicated. Then a sufficiently natural grouping will give us a notable
quartette in Renan, Taine himself, Montégut, and Scherer. We may then
diverge to another group, who represent the influence of Sainte-Beuve
very strongly blended with that of Gautier, the most distinguished of
these being Saint-Victor, Baudelaire, and Flaubert. Then we may take the
“Naturalists”; then two notable theorists who pushed Taine’s own theory
further, one in a less, the other in a more fruitful direction; then a
fresh batch of critics of the generally academic or specially erudite
kind. After which we may cast back to a kind of “Cossack” division—
écheloned over the century,—and finish with at least a salute to certain
famous living representatives of French criticism, of whom it is not,
according to our plan, lawful to speak further.

The trio first referred to were more or less contemporaries, and present
various tendencies of literature and criticism in the nineteenth century
strikingly enough. Two of them, Jules Barbey d’Aurévilly and Victor
Euphémion Philarète Chasles, were men of letters by profession, and in
constant practice and publicity, for the greater part of the period: the
third, Ximénès Doudan, published hardly anything in his lifetime, and
was suddenly revealed, after his death and within the last quarter of
the century, as one of those observers of the λάθε βίωσας who tend to
become rarer and rarer in modern life.

[Sidenote: _Philarète Chasles._]

The eldest of the three, Philarète Chasles,[827] was at an early period
of his life a refugee in England for political reasons, and acquired
there a knowledge of our literature and institutions which stood him in
good stead for literary purposes ever afterwards. He was, however, at
least as well acquainted with the literature of his own country, and in
the summer of 1828 he divided the Academy’s prize, for a study of French
literature in the sixteenth century, with an Essay[828] which is still
worth studying, not merely as a foil to Sainte-Beuve’s famous and
epoch-making book, but in itself. Some hold that, in one piece or
another of a man’s early work, his whole literary development is, so to
say, _acorned_; there is certainly something of the phenomenon in this
tractate of Chasles. It has plenty of knowledge; it is well written; it
abounds in intelligent _aperçus_; and it inclines (if with a limitation
to be stated immediately) in the Romantic direction not obscurely, in
the catholic, comparative, historical direction beyond all question. But
there is a certain deficiency in grasp; the style, though often
brilliant and forcible in a way, too seldom concentrates itself to light
up, or to blast home, an important proposition; and in the principles
there is a certain transaction and trimming to catch the favour of the
judges. These merits and these defects alike continued to mark Chasles'
work for the fifty years during which he unweariedly performed it: but
the defects, if they did not exactly get the upper hand, made him more
of a journalist than of a representative of literature. He was useful
and important to his contemporaries, especially as a populariser of that
English literature which was needed as an alterative by French, at least
as much as French was by English. But even some special interest[829]
cannot make me rank him very high as a critic.

[Sidenote: _Barbey d’Aurévilly._]

If Chasles gave some occasion to those who charged him with being a
“Swiss of Letters,” a journalist ready to do any journey-work—this was
certainly not the case with Barbey d’Aurevilly, one of the most
considerable eccentrics of recent literature. A dandy and an apostle of
Dandyism, a practitioner of the most “precious” style, a transgressor as
to forbidden subjects, and at the same time one of the most formidable
of those free lances of Catholicism of whom Ourliac, Pontmartin, and
Veuillot are the chief others in his time and country, Barbey
d’Aurévilly did a good deal to invite the title of charlatan, which was
freely bestowed on him by his numerous and recklessly provoked enemies.
But I do not think he quite deserved it at any time: and in a very large
part of his extensive work[830] he did not deserve it at all. Nor are
many people likely to follow me in reading this without acknowledging
him as a chief example of that steady improvement in critical power with
age, which has been so often noted. He never, indeed, became a good
critic _sans phrase_—that is to say, a trustworthy one. In his country
the danger-flag is constantly flying; or, rather, there are all sorts of
danger-flags, some of which even the tolerably wary may not always
recognise as such.

[Sidenote: _On Hugo._]

Not the most difficult case is that of the attacks on Hugo, which
provoked the poet to some of his most undignified Billingsgate in reply.
It may seem indeed odd that a person who, though with a difference, was
himself a _romantique enragé_—a man who calls Villemain _un eunuque
littéraire opéré par le goût_—should dislike Hugo. But, first of all,
there is the religious and political grudge against Hugo as a deserter:
and Barbey never forgets his grudges, though he deplores the effect of
other grudges on Chasles. And, secondly, one begins to wonder whether,
in the soul of his soul, he cared much for poetry. One of his epigrams
on Hugo himself,[831] clever as it is, gives more than a hint of this.
The poet is _un puits artésien de poésie—intarissable, mais de la même
eau_. This is to a very great extent true; but who ever quarrelled with
a fountain of living water because it is a fountain of living water, and
does not, like an artificial one on a holiday, alternately play milk,
and milk-punch, and raspberry vinegar? Certainly no one who had ever
thoroughly realised what the Water of Poetry—the Water of Life for the
soul—is. So, too, no one, whatever his political and religious views,
who can taste this Water of Life, could possibly dismiss the
_Contemplations_ as _un livre accablant, un livre qui doit descendre
vite dans l’oubli des hommes_. And his distaste leads him into
puerilities and almost stupidities of verbal criticism, such as the
question, when Hugo has written, “O chiens! qu’avez vous donc dans les
dents? C’est son nom.” “Comment s’y est on pris pour l’y faire entrer?”

[Sidenote: _On others._]

But his dislike for Hugo does not, in the least, conciliate him to, for
instance, Mérimée—the same prejudices working in a different way, and
summoning others to their aid. This exquisite master of style and irony,
this ice-covered volcano, is at one time[832] _un morceau de bois_ (I
wish some one would show me the Broceliande where such wood grows!), at
another a “wading bird” (_échassier_) who occasionally fishes up a
_Carmen_! (“O lead us to those ponds where _Carmens_ swarm!”) A writer
who is at least as different from Mérimée as from Hugo, George Sand, is
_le plus grand préjugé contemporain_ (another example of Barbey’s
successes, at least in epigram) _la grande routine dans l’admiration de
ce siècle_, nay, actually _commune_—which even those who have no mania
for the lady or her work may think extravagant.[833] One stares as one
reads that Southey’s _Nelson_ is _bêtement raconté_, till one remembers
Barbey’s intense, flaming, roaring Byronism, or, perhaps, till one reads
the rather tell-tale statement that “stern” [Sterne] _veut dire sérieux
en Anglais_, which certainly does not argue a nice acquaintance with the
_nuances_ of the English language. As for the other statement, that
“Johnson, l’affreux docteur Johnson, l’hippopotame de la lourde critique
Anglaise, fut un de ceux qui se moquèrent le plus de Sterne,” it is
sufficient to answer, “Why, no, sir!”

[Sidenote: _Strong redeeming points in him._]

It may seem strange, after my citing these instances of wrong-going,
which might be very largely multiplied, that I should have given even
partial praise to Barbey d’Aurévilly as a critic. Yet I cannot withdraw
it. In the first place, as examples already given will have shown, he
was really a great master of the critical epigram—a thing capable of
much abuse, and of late specially abused and vulgarised and brought into
discredit, but (when well-bred, and well-trained, and well-ridden) a
great battle-horse in the critical stable for all that. His own critical
axioms, though generally requiring correction and completion, are often
most valuable, as when he says[834] that the two great critical
qualities are Penetration and Weight. Only he should have added (but the
addition would have hit himself hard) “Directing Judgment,” without
which diamond-point and battering-ram momentum can but waste themselves
or do mischief. Indeed, in his own most misguided criticisms,
penetration and weight themselves are seldom wanting. His ninth volume,
_Les Critiques ou les Juges jugés_, is often quite admirable, almost
always noteworthy, on the most different people—on Joubert as on
Villemain, on Nisard as on Sainte-Beuve. And almost everywhere the
writing is _alive_; the liking, if it be only crotchet, the dislike, if
it be only prejudice, is, _pro tanto_ and for the moment, real, felt,
_vécu_. He is rather a bad example; he has, I think, like Veuillot,
already done harm, not merely in France but in England. But I should be
loath to lose him: for he is not as the scribes.

[Sidenote: _Doudan._]

It is impossible to imagine a more curious contrast to the often by no
means ignoble hack-work of Chasles, and the restless and somewhat
“posing” activity of Barbey, than the fireside and library arm-chair
quiet which pervades the writings of Doudan.[835] Critically, indeed,
that work is chiefly valuable as a placid and agreeable reflection of
the workings of such a life on an intellect above the average, but of no
gigantic force or “genial” individuality, and a taste for literature
which never raised itself to very active or deliberate discharges of the
critical function. His two most regular critical exercises, the early
article “De la nouvelle école poétique”[836] occasioned by
Sainte-Beuve’s _Tableau_, and the later but (unless I mistake) not
precisely dated “Les Révolutions du Goût,”[837] are more curious than
exactly important. They exhibit, as the work of these half-recluses
often does, an odd mixture of reflection of the time-movements and
reaction against them. His style of opposition (for he does oppose it)
to the Romantic movement is double, and in each case rather unexpected.
[Sidenote: _Interest of his general attitude,_] One horn is pure
Chauvinism. “Who are these Germans and English, that we Frenchmen should
imitate them?” This he shed later. But he always lifted up the other—a
curious form of belief in progress and development, which once more
almost persuades us to believe that no believer in Progress _can_ be a
critic as such and for the time. In the “De la Nouvelle École” this
takes the cruder form, common in the early nineteenth century, of asking
why we, with all our glorious gains, should go back to, if not exactly
barbarous ages, yet less favoured ones? In the _Révolutions_ it becomes
a subtler, but perhaps more dangerous, heresy, which draws to its aid
the fashionable fancies about time and climate and the like. According
to Doudan, it would seem, a real historical criticism is impossible,—
“Les nuances délicates s'évanouissent quand les mœurs, etc., ont
changé.” You cannot keep on the tracks of poesy, _cette science émue et
populaire_ (note the Montaignesque perfection of the phrase, whatever we
may think of the argument), you cannot sound _ces magnifiques abîmes_.
Each generation sees only one side of the Beautiful—and apparently you
cannot extract and combine the visions of each from their records. Which
is, I think, blasphemy against Criticism and Literature; but some fight
might, no doubt, be made for it, and it is admirably and suggestively
put.

[Sidenote: _and particular utterances._]

It would require a separate and elaborate handling to show how far these
half-progressist half-nihilist views are reflected in the literary
utterances which stud Doudan’s _Letters_: but some of these must be
given. He never achieves the supremacy of his very close analogue
Joubert: but he is certainly “to be made a note of.” For instance,[838]
in a certain _Chartreuse_ (not otherwise identified, but which must be
Beyle’s from what follows) he says (as he should not) that it is
“stupid,” and accounts for, at the same time as he disables, his own
judgment by adding that he has not read it. But he knows other books of
the author, who is “un mauvais sujet au courant de tous les procédés
d’imagination.” Unjust of course: but with how much justice and with how
much more felicity in it! In 1843 he must have somewhat modified his
fifteen years’ earlier disapproval of Old French, for in the _Roman de
la Rose_ he sees[839] “mille idées passer dans ces ombres du Moyen Âge”—
ideas, we may retort, which, if you see, you may surely cry Halt! to,
and register. Twenty years later again, in 1865,[840] he not merely
condemns, in the _Mémoires d’Outre Tombe_, “le langage torturé, comme
dans M. Victor Hugo, pour produire des effets,” which might be thought
to show a certain obsolescence of judgment, but clears himself from this
charge, and from his old fault of Chauvinist criticism, not merely by
defending Eugénie de Guérin but by approving Charlotte Bronté, a
combination of literary lady-loves which is not commonplace. He even
consents, later still, to read Miss Braddon: and expresses warm and
intelligent approval of _The Small House at Allington_. Only fanatical
_Goetheaner_ will find much fault with his characterisation,[841] in one
of his interesting letters to A. W. Schlegel, of _Meister_ as
“excessively desultory and chimerical” in matter: and all but fanatical
Hugonians will at least understand his unhappiness[842] at _William
Shakespeare_, though the expressions of it have a touch of the comic.
When you have read the book for ten minutes you feel as if you were
standing on your head. Polyphemus must have written like it when he had
eaten a Greek and drunk a skinful of wine. And the younger generation
finds it admirable! These are the tricks that await all of us as we grow
older, unless we keep our feet (and our heads) very carefully when we go
into the House of Literature. But Doudan is not excessively affected by
them, though, on the other hand, he does not shake himself vigorously
and critically free. He is a good specimen of the purely contemplative
and “occasional” critic—a sort of hermit of the desert, who does not
object to decide on cases that present themselves, but who will not go
to seek them.[843]

[Sidenote: _Renan._]

We may turn from Doudan to a very different figure, introducing a new
and important group. It is not uncommon to see M. Renan spoken of as a
considerable critic; on the other hand, I think some one (and no mean
authority, if my memory serves me) is reported to have said of him,
“Renan n’a pas le sens littéraire.” Both statements are excessive: but
at the risk of shocking some readers, I am bound to say that the second
is a great deal nearer the truth than the first. A _biblical_ critic he
was, no doubt: but, as has been pointed out at the beginning of this
history, the operations of the biblical critic are always conducted on
principles different from, and usually on principles diametrically
opposed to, the principles of the criticism of literature. Yet it may be
urged, Did he not help to produce one volume, and that on a very
interesting period, of the great _Histoire Littéraire de la France_? Did
he not almost precede Mr Arnold himself in arguing for the necessity of
Criticism, and the excellent influence not merely of Science but of
Literature? and quite precede him in exalting the literary uses and
virtues of Celtic? Has he not left us, from the _Averroès_ and the
_Avenir de la Science_ downwards, constant literary allusions and
handlings, frequent literary papers, on subjects ranging from Spinoza to
Béranger?

This is all quite true: and if it were reasonable, as some people seem
to think it is, to expect that an author should use as great length in
showing why he does not deal with a subject as in dealing with what he
thinks it right to handle, I could, as in the case of others from
Voltaire downwards, produce chapter and verse to any extent in negative
justification. But M. Renan seemed to me, on a careful perusal of all
his then published work, twenty years ago[844] and more—he seemed to me,
on a repetition and extension of that reading a dozen years later[845]—
and he seems to me now, after recurring to his work for the present
purpose—seldom or never to have regarded literature as literature. He
said, in so many words, at the beginning of his career, and he published
the saying towards the close,[846] that literary work is _only_ valuable
as the work of its time, that “the _Pensées_ of Pascal and the _Sermons_
of Bossuet, if they appeared to-day, would be hardly worth notice.” This
exaggeration of the historic view is interesting, of course; but it is
as fatal to criticism as the absolute refusal to take that view.

[Sidenote: _Taine._]

Not thus is to be dismissed one who thought Renan a critic and a great
one. Hippolyte Taine _was_ a critic, though too often (not always) a
“black horseman” of criticism. He was a great æsthetician, he was a
brilliant literary historian—that is to say, what should be a critic on
the greatest scale. He could do splendid justice[847] to another critic
of tendencies and predilections so different from his own as those of
Paul de Saint-Victor. To question his competence in pure criticism may
seem more than presumption, it may seem pure fatuity. But, though a poet
is dispensed from having a conscience, a critic and a historian of
criticism is not.

[Sidenote: _His_ culpa.]

The fault of Taine as a critic was put once for all from two different
points of view and by two widely different, though each in his different
way supremely competent, persons, in that conversation at one of the
Magny dinners which is referred to elsewhere,[848] and the reporting of
which,[849] whether justifiable in itself or not, should bribe
Rhadamanthus in his condemnation of the Goncourtian _reportage_. He did
not understand the sublime—the “magnificent”—in literature, as no less a
person than Sainte-Beuve told him on that occasion: and he did not
understand it, because, as no less a person than Gautier (consciously or
unconsciously repeating Longinus) told him, he did not see that the
secret of literature lies in the “mots rayonnants,” the “mots de
lumière.” Or, rather, he _would_ not understand: for as two of his
selected quotations,[850] from such an apostle of the _mot rayonnant_ as
Saint-Victor, show, he had the root of the matter in him, but would not
let it grow.

[Sidenote: _His miscellaneous critical work._]

Taine is, therefore, the capital example of the harm which may be done
by what is called “philosophy” in criticism. If he had resisted this
tendency, and had allowed himself simply to receive and assimilate the
facts, he might have been one of the great critics of the world. That he
_could_ have done so is shown, I think, completely by the greatest work
of his life, the _Origines de la France Contemporaine_—in which, with a
good grace, if not explicitly, swallowing all he had said in his earlier
remarks on Carlyle’s _French Revolution_, he allowed himself to yield to
the other facts, and established the truth for ever, on and in an
impregnable foundation and circumvallation of document. But he had no
time to do everything: and in his literary perversity he had gone too
far. He began as quite a young man, but not young enough to be immature,
in the famous studies on La Fontaine and Livy, by a philosophical
crystallisation of the process which Sainte-Beuve had almost invented,
but had always kept in a fluid and flexible condition—the process of
inquiring into the “circumstances,” the ancestry, country, surroundings,
religion, tastes, friends, career, of the man of letters. As
crystallised under the influence of a philosophical determinism, this
process became one of inquiring into the racial origin, chronological
period, and general environment (_milieu_) of the individual, the
school, the literature, as a result of which these “had to be”—what they
seemed to M. Taine. The man of letters, be he Shakespeare or Voltaire,
Dante or Cervantes, was simply a made-up prescription.

[Sidenote: _His_ Histoire de la Littérature Anglaise.]

It might not have been so disastrous as it was, if M. Taine had had the
audacity—or from a different point of view the pusillanimity—to choose
the literature of his own country as his sphere of principal operation.
His theory would not have been so cramping as Nisard’s, and he was
better furnished with facilities of direct appreciation. That there
would have been faults, gaps, oddities, in the survey is certain: but it
would have been a great and an invaluable history of French Literature.
Now his famous _Histoire de la Littérature Anglaise_—one of the most
brilliantly written of its class, one of the most interesting, perhaps
_the_ history of literature, which has most of literature itself—is only
valuable for qualities which are not of its own essence, and in the
qualities which are of its essence is very nearly valueless. To any one
who knows “those who are there and those who are not”—the authors whom
M. Taine discusses and the authors whom he skips—it is a stimulating and
piquant, if not exactly an informing, book to read. Those who do not
know them will be led hopelessly astray. To begin with, M. Taine himself
did not know enough, though he knew creditably much. He had many
distractions and avocations at the time, and did not plunge on the
document with anything like the “brazen-bowelled” energy which he
afterwards showed in the _Origines_. Whole periods—especially where
language or dialect present difficulties—are jumped with the most
perfect nonchalance, but unfortunately not always in silence. Those
minor writers who give the key of a literature much more surely than the
greater ones (for these are akin to all the world) receive very little
attention. The native, automatic, irrational, sympathies and
preferences, which keep a man right much oftener than they lead him
wrong, are necessarily wanting. Nothing interferes to save the critic
from the influence of his theory. He has constructed for himself, on
that theory, an ideal Englishman with big feet (because the soil of our
country is marshy and soft), with respect for authority (as is shown by
English boys calling their father “Governor”), Protestant, melancholy,
with several other attributes. This ideal Englishman is further moulded,
tooled, typed, by race, time, _milieu_: and he becomes Chaucer,
Shakespeare, Pope, Byron. And the literature of Byron, Pope,
Shakespeare, Chaucer has to deliver itself in a concatenation
accordingly.

[Sidenote: _Its shortcomings._]

It is unnecessary to add much to what Sainte-Beuve and Scherer,[851]
both his personal friends, both practically Frenchmen, both acquainted
as few Frenchmen have been with English literature itself, one of
supreme and the other of high critical competency, said in deprecation
of this proceeding. But an Englishman, especially if he knows something
of other literatures as well as his own, enjoys a _parrhesia_ which they
did not enjoy. And the only adequate verdict that can be pronounced on
Taine’s History of English Literature is that, great as a book and as a
creation, it is as criticism not faulty, not unequal, but positively and
utterly worthless. It does not even supply the native with useful
independent checks and views “as others see,” for the views are the
views of a theory, not a man. It supplies the foreigner with a false and
dangerous travesty.

[Sidenote: _Instances of them._]

But in reference to so famous, and in a way so engaging, a book, it
might seem impertinent not to descend a little more to particulars. Let
anybody contrast the handlings of Dryden and of Swift. The former is
one, I do not hesitate to say, of the worst criticisms ever written by a
great writer, the latter one of the best. And why? Because Swift—great,
arch-great as he is—is very much of a piece: and Taine can adjust him to
his theory. Dryden is not of a piece at all, except in regard to that
purely literary craftsmanship which a foreigner can judge least well. He
is scattered, eclectic, contradictory: and if you make any general
theory about him, or even bring any general theory in contact with him,
you get into difficulties at once. About Keats—a great person surely,
and in casting shadows before him immense—Taine is null; about Shelley,
ludicrous; I am not sure that he so much as mentions Browning, most of
the best of whose work was done when he wrote. To take examples all over
the history, on _Piers Plowman_, on the Caroline Poets, on Gray and
Collins, he is at the mercy of any cub in criticism, and a thing to look
at and pass for the more gracious and benign animals therein. Sometimes,
as we have said above, he tempts the horrid reflection, “Had he really
_read_ the authors of whom he speaks?” And always his neglect (which may
have endeared him to Mérimée)[852] of the minor figures throws his
sketches of the major out of drawing, out of composition, out of
proportion. That he started from Sainte-Beuve is certain; but he comes
round to a point absolutely opposed to Sainte-Beuve’s serene
observatory. He speaks of what he has _not_ seen.

[Sidenote: _Montégut: his peculiarities._]

It is strange, though perhaps not inexplicable, that the critical renown
of Émile Montégut is not greater with us than it is. He was one of the
best and most popular writers of the _Revue des Deux Mondes_ at a time
when it still held the position of the chief critical periodical in
Europe. He dealt largely with subjects of special interest to
Englishmen. Yet, with us, he has nothing like the reputation, not merely
of Sainte-Beuve, but of Scherer and Taine. The reasons for this lie
partly in the fact that Montégut was, I believe, at all times a man who
wrote for his bread, and so not only had to do translation,[853]
biography on commission, and other hack-work, but even in his proper
sphere could not pick and choose his tasks. Another cause may probably
be found in his fondness—I will not say for prolixity, but for handling
on the very great scale. I have said elsewhere that I believe part of
the success of Sainte-Beuve to be due to the fact that in his very best
days he very rarely dealt, at any one time, with any one subject at more
than single (or at most double) _causerie_ length. Montégut’s treatment
of George Eliot runs to 160 pages, that of Charlotte Bronté to very
little less, those of Musset and (more remarkably still) of Nodier to
120 each. Now, though people will sometimes read critical estimates of
great length, they will rarely re-read them. And they do not show the
qualities of the critic, especially to the running reader, with as much
clearness, crispness, and variety of effect as do shorter, but not too
short, pieces.

Yet these qualities in Montégut were rare and admirable.
I do not know that I have found any work, short of the
Aristotelian-Longinian-Coleridgian level, stand the process of
re-reading, among the thousand applications of it which this book has
necessitated, better than his. His critical appeal is not _tapageur_ and
peremptory like that of Taine; nor has it quite the clear, vigorous,
masculine, common-sense judgment, when prejudice does not interfere, of
Scherer; but it is extraordinarily enveloping, penetrating, intimate.
With Taine you get soon tired, if not of his _opes_, which are indeed
considerable, yet of his _fumum strepitumque_: with Scherer you think
that he has said what he ought to have said, but you are not very
anxious to hear him say it again,[854] and there is rarely any “second
intention,” any suggested but not obvious thought, for you to hear.
Montégut’s delicate, intricate reflection and sympathy, especially at
the length at which they are given, can hardly, by the most attentive
and sensitive of readers, be taken in all at once; there are always
gleanings of the grapes, always second mowings of the grass to be made.

Further, Montégut was, in this group, the only one who did not commit
himself to the absolute and inseparable identification of critical
inquiry with the construction and application of a general theory of
national character and history. He was not, indeed, always free from
this besetting delusion of nineteenth-century criticism, a delusion
which has done nearly as much harm as all the idols of Neo-classicism
put together.[855] On the contrary, he has whole essays tending in this
direction.[856] But his best work is done in quite a different one, and,
in a late and remarkable study of Saint-René Taillandier,[857] he
expressly draws a contrast between _critique littéraire_ and _critique
qui se propose un but social_, and lays down that in the former “les
œuvres n’ont d’intérêt que par leur beauté et leur perfection.” And so,
unenslaved by non-literary theory, and only “servant,” in the good old
sense of lover, to the Muses, he is able to discern the interest of work
in both directions, while the pure national-character critics are
hampered in one by the theory they take to help them along in the other,
and not much helped by it even there.

[Sidenote: _Delicacy and range of his work._]

Among the best examples of Montégut’s critical genius that I can think
of is the short essay on Boccaccio[858] (where he shows conclusively
that great length was not, in the least, an indispensable condition with
him), almost all his English papers,[859] and the exceedingly agreeable
study of Théophile Gautier,[860] which remains the best thing ever
written on that author—difficult, though himself delightful. If I were
an admirer of the Guérins (I _am_, though no more than reason, an
admirer of Eugénie), I think I should prefer his papers on these two
extraordinarily overpraised young persons to either Sainte-Beuve’s or Mr
Arnold’s. The above-mentioned piece on Saint-René Taillandier is a real
triumph of friendly advocacy. On Béranger—a subject, though for
different reasons, almost as much a touchstone as Gautier—he is again
wonderfully happy.

Indeed it is rather difficult—except when he is _Tainising_—to discover
where Montégut is not happy. To his natural genius for delicate
appreciation he united very wide reading, not merely in French, but in
English, German, and Italian. In these foreign tongues he has the
unconventional _main heureuse_, which sometimes, though not very often,
attends foreigners who are not ignorant and who follow their own
judgment. The average superficial critic in England to-day may think
that he took _Guy Livingstone_[861] much too seriously; the future
Sainte-Beuve of England may not. He could appreciate—as, again, not all
our own critics could or can—the unequal, and for a foreigner one might
think hopelessly baffling, qualities of Charles Kingsley. I am not sure
that this “horizontality”—this faculty of bringing himself in line with
German, Italian, English, French subjects and interpreting them, has not
done him some harm. It is something so much out of the way, if not out
of the reach, of most people that they suspect it. But in the court of
International Critical Law—which, had it power as it has authority,
would govern the literary world—his case is pretty safe.

[Sidenote: _Scherer: peculiar_ moral _character of his criticism_.]

It has been recognised from the first that the obituary epigram of M.
Edouard Rod on M. Edmond Scherer, “Il ne jugeait pas les écrits avec son
intelligence; il les jugeait avec son caractère”—especially if it be
remembered that _caractère_ in French combines the meaning of the two
English words “character” and “temper”—is an exposition, as happy as it
was meant to be friendly, of the _defects_ of the subject’s criticism.
But, like all epigrams, it is scarcely adequate even to the portion of
the subject to which it applies: and this subject was by no means
one-sided. Fully to understand the dozen or so volumes[862] of trenchant
and well-informed censorship which Scherer left, it is necessary, for
all but persons of unusual powers of intellectual divination, to know
much more of the circumstances than is always needful. He was, though
French by birth, Swiss by extraction on the father’s side, and English
on the mother’s: and he was brought up, in the straitest school of
French Protestantism and English dissent, to become a Protestant-pastor.
Continental Protestantism has always tended towards freethought, and
after many years of progressive “advance” in his opinions, M. Scherer
reached something like positive Nihilism in religion, or at least
Agnosticism of the extremest kind. He had, though he must have read very
widely in French Literature,[863] written little or nothing on it during
this period: and he did not become a literary critic till he was
forty-five. Moreover, in the process of unsettlement of his belief, his
temper, which had always been very serious, seems to have acquired, as
in the case of Mark Pattison and others, though not all, something like
a definite roughening or souring. Further, he had paid much attention to
philosophical study, and was peremptory in his requirement of “a
philosophy” in all works of art and letters.[864] Yet further, his
relinquishment of religion had made him only the more strenuous on the
score of morality: and against any book or writer showing loose morals,
or tolerance of them, he waged truceless war. [Sidenote: _Its consequent
limitations._] And to conclude, while he had a somewhat limited
sense[865] of the comic, and was slow to appreciate irony, _litotes_,
and other things like unto them, his very intelligence, though
remarkably strong and in certain senses acute, was distinctly wanting in
flexibility, accommodation, and “play.” It was a chisel rather than a
watchspring-file, and when it encountered resistance or stoppage of any
sort, it was apt rather to try to batter and break than to insinuate
itself and so to open a way.

[Sidenote: _The solid merits accompanying them._]

Add to these influences, not always tending for good, others tending
powerfully the right way—great learning, the freedom from national
prejudice derived from mixed blood, an inflexible honesty of intention,
a perfect fearlessness, and a clear and forcible if not exactly
attractive style—and the qualities of the resultant are easily
anticipated. Such a critic will be weakest in the expression of
dislikes. On Molière, Diderot, Carlyle, Baudelaire, especially on the
three Frenchmen, M. Scherer is scarcely even interesting or edifying.
His imperfect sympathy with the comic in the first case; his porcupine
morality, perhaps again in the first, and certainly in the second and
fourth; his dislike of the eccentric, the abnormal, the bizarre, in the
third and fourth,—make real appreciation impossible for him. “What he
says may be used against _him_,” to play on the famous police caution:
but in regard to his subjects it is not so much ineffectual as almost
irrelevant.

On the other hand, when he speaks of writers with whom he is more or
less _in_ sympathy,—on Milton, Wordsworth, Lamartine, George Eliot,—very
few critics are better worth reading. His temperament saves him from the
usual danger of exaggeration, except very rarely, when the indulgence is
quite pleasant; his general approval confines his exposition of
particular defects within the limits of an acute liberality; and his
setting forth of merits has all the sufficiency which can be conferred
by full knowledge, untiring industry, a strong intelligence, and a
practised and logical method.

When, on the other hand, cases of attraction and repulsion are about
equally present, at least when the _caractère_ allows the intelligence
full play, he is almost, if not quite, as good.[866] And as these two
classes of Essays are, after all, in the majority, the criticism of M.
Scherer is a most valuable exercise both for his craftsfellows and for
the general student of literature. When his vision is not distorted by
prejudice, he is the inferior of hardly any critic in argumentative
power: there is a directness, solidity, simplicity about his methods and
his conclusions which, without being in itself better or worse than the
accumulative but not always decisive method of Sainte-Beuve and the
suggestive approaches of Montégut, forms a very useful alternative and
complement to both. He was never popular either in France or elsewhere:
and he has hardly charm enough to recover, or rather attain, popularity
at any future time. But on no subject on which he has written favourably
or impartially—and not on all of those where the _caractère_ has had too
much the upper hand—will it be safe for the real student to neglect him.
And if that counsel of perfection which I have more than once adumbrated
here—the compilation of a critical _corpus_ of the best work of all
times and literatures—were ever undertaken, it would be possible to
select from his work a volume, and perhaps more than one, of the
strongest and soundest criticism to be found in the French language.

[Sidenote: _Saint-Beuve_ + _Gautier_.]

These four notable writers represent, as has been said, the principles
and practice of Sainte-Beuve, more or less hardened and methodised by
an attempt to make a philosophy of them in Taine’s case, coloured by
personal and “professional” tendencies in those of Renan and Scherer,
least altered in Montégut. But the specially Romantic tone, which,
though it never quite disappeared, had become less and less noticeable
in Sainte-Beuve himself, shows little in any of them, unless it be in
the last. On the contrary, in another group, where Sainte-Beuve’s
general influence was strongly qualified by that of Gautier, the
Romantic side, both formal and “tonal,” appears very strongly, and
leads on to a development rather more noteworthy (except in the
attacks upon it) for creative than for critical results in the
Realist-Naturalist-Impressionist-Symbolist movement. The chief members
of this group[867] were, the famous master of _flamboyant_ style
Saint-Victor, the poets Baudelaire and Banville, and the novelist
Flaubert, with whom we may join the band (among which some of them
figured with Sainte-Beuve and Gautier himself) of contributors to the
very remarkable _Poètes Français_, issued by Crépet forty years ago.
[Sidenote: _Banville._] Banville needs but little separate notice, for
though a delightful prose-writer, as well as a charming poet, he did
not write very much criticism besides his contributions to Crépet. But
his Tractate of Versification[868] is most important in the history of
French prosody.

[Sidenote: _Saint-Victor._]

One very famous writer just mentioned, Paul de Saint-Victor, is perhaps
hardly here entitled to the place which he must occupy in a History of
Literature, though, as a fact, all his production came more or less
under the head of criticism in its vaguer and wider sense. The
distinction is due partly at least to the fact that his professional
criticism was in the main either purely theatrical or else artistic,
with neither of which branches, as such, do we meddle. But there is more
to say. Saint-Victor published little of this; and the chief books on
which his reputation depends—the rather famous _Hommes et Dieux_[869]
earlier, and _Les Deux Masques_,[870] an elaborate study of literary
drama from classical times, the publication of which he undertook just
before his death—put forward at least some claim to be strictly of our
material; and invite attention because of the elaborate perfection of
their style. Saint-Victor, after his death, was made the subject of that
“nimious and indiscreet” biography which has played the ghoul to almost
all men of letters, especially in France, for many years past: and a
story, already referred to, has obtained currency that he built up his
paragraphs by dotting over the sheet nouns or epithets of striking
qualities which he wished to introduce, and then filling in the contexts
to suit. This, which is half a caricature and half an antithesis of the
Flaubertian theory and practice, is by no means incredible, and though
the practice lends itself to criticism, it is capable enough of defence,
but not as criticism itself. The more serious point is that
Saint-Victor’s interests are obviously not in pure literary
appreciation. He rarely attempts it, and when he does (as in his article
on Swift) the result is sometimes disastrous. Where he succeeds he is
rather historic, and historic-pictorial, than literary. Deriving partly
from Hugo (whom he worshipped) and partly from Gautier, he has more
proportion, less immensity in grandeur and in absurdity than the first,
and a somewhat greater sense of humanity generally than the second,
while his phrase (as in the sentence admired by Taine and quoted above)
is sometimes of enchanting beauty. He is interesting to compare with Mr
Pater: but the Englishman has very greatly the advantage of him as a
pure critic.

[Sidenote: _Baudelaire._]

If Baudelaire had given less attention to the criticism of art[871] and
more to that of literature, and if he had been permitted more health and
longer life,[872] it is more than probable—it is nearly certain—that he
would have been a very considerable literary critic. As it is, there is
hardly a page of the two hundred or so which concern the subject in the
volume of his posthumously published or republished works, entitled
_L’Art Romantique_, that does not contain most remarkable things. He had
paid beforehand for Gautier’s admirable Preface by the most elaborate of
his own individual appreciations: and the shorter notices of Hugo and
others, with the few reviews of individual books (including _Les
Misérables_ and _Madame Bovary_), make a worthy company for it. But
Baudelaire’s special aptitude is for criticism of a slightly more
abstract kind, such as his _Conseils aux Jeunes Littérateurs_, _Les
Drames et Les Romans Honnêtes_, _&c._; while the actual appreciations of
particulars just noticed are apt to drift off in this direction. And it
was not to be regretted: for these _axiomata media_ are often extremely
true and subtle. If people would only study them, the popular idea—as
far as there is any popular idea at all—of Baudelaire as a passionate
and paradoxical champion of immorality and abnormality of all kinds
would be strangely altered.[873] Irony is indeed almost always present:
but it is yoked with a feeling for art which is extraordinary, and with
a sound good sense which, especially in its ironic leaven, often makes
one think of Thackeray.

[Sidenote: _Crépet’s_ Les Poètes Français]

As a combined anthology of poetry and criticism, Crépet’s _Poètes
Français_[874] has no superior—it may be doubted whether it has an
equal. After its general Introduction by Sainte-Beuve, the mediæval and
fifteenth-century poets were committed to the admirably competent hands
of Louis Moland, a member of the second Romantic generation mainly
represented in this Book, who gave up the bar to devote himself to
editing and studying older French literature; Anatole de Montaiglon, a
still more learned scholar and palæographer; Charles d’Héricault, the
remarkable excellence of whose fifteenth and early sixteenth century
studies has been referred to before, and who has hardly a critical fault
except a slight over-valuation of his pet subjects. With the sixteenth
century—or rather with the Pléiade—recourse was naturally had to writers
who were less of specialists and more of men of letters generally.
Gautier, Baudelaire, and Banville are contributors; Janin’s article on
Lamartine is one of the best specimens of his more serious criticism:
while the great mass of minor poets were divided among divers others, of
whom the most fully presented and the best known were Charles
Asselineau, the bibliographer of Romanticism and a diligent student with
a pleasant pen; Hippolyte Babou, the accredited inventor of Baudelaire’s
title _Fleurs du Mal_, and a man of remarkable though (except here)
rather wasted talent; Philoxène Boyer (“Dans les salons de Philoxène,
Nous étions quatre-vingt _rimeurs_”); and Edouard Fournier, an
inestimable editor, in the _Bibliothèque Elzévirienne_ and elsewhere,
and the author, among innumerable other things, of the famous
collection, _L’Esprit des Autres_ (Paris, 1855).

The whole collection is a real literary and critical monument—
independently of the merit of many of the articles—because it is
practically the first attempt to deal with the entire poetry of a
literature in a catholic and impartial manner, uninfluenced by any
prevailing theory exalting or depressing particular periods, or
particular writers, at the expense of others. The nineteenth century had
its faults, and many of them: but this book could hardly have been
written before the nineteenth century.

[Sidenote: _Flaubert: the “Single Word.”_]

If Rousseau, who wrote no criticism at all, ought, according to some, to
have a large place in a History thereof, how much more Flaubert? For the
author of _Madame Bovary_, though he wrote, or at least published,
hardly any, has filled his _Letters_[875] with critical remarks, and is
the acknowledged godfather, though by no means the inventor (for we have
seen it as far back as La Bruyère, nay, as Longolius, if not as far back
as Virgil), of the Doctrine of the Single Word—the notion that there is
only _one_ phrase, sometimes only one single and integral combination of
letters, which will really express an author’s meaning, and that he must
wrestle with Time and the dictionary and his own invention till he finds
this. This, we say, will be found _passim_ in Flaubert’s _Letters_; it
will be found, by those who do not wish to read all these (they make a
mistake), admirably and forcibly put by his disciple Maupassant in the
Introduction thereto. The doctrine,[876] though an obvious exaggeration
of the _true_ doctrine of the importance of “the word,” is an
interesting one, and has been—perhaps still is—an influential, but, on
our general principles, I do not think it necessary to give Flaubert
much space here on the strength of it. He never chose to embody his
opinions on this matter in any regular form; probably, with his very
peculiar temperament, it would have been quite impossible for him to do
so, while his headlong ways of thought and speech, so oddly contrasted
with the enormous patience of his writing, made his critical utterances
in relation to others mainly genial and Gargantuan splutters—things
_gigantesque_, to use his own favourite word, but not critical.

[Sidenote: “_Naturalism._”]

As in the case of Flaubert and “Realism,” so in the case of “Naturalism”
and M. Zola, the more general considerations will be for the Conclusion,
the selection of facts and documents, on which they are based, for this
place. To obtain these facts and documents we must a little break the
rule of not noticing persons who have lived very recently, in the case
of M. Zola himself and his friend M. de Goncourt. Their _numerus_ must
undergo the law of representation by chiefs which presses ever and ever
more upon us. Of the host opposed to them, the chief and principal, M.
Ferdinand Brunetière, is still living.

[Sidenote: _Zola._]

The author of _Les Rougon-Macquart_ (for out of those good manners which
do not determine by death, I shall not call him by the periphrasis
against which he specially protested, “the author of _L’Assommoir_”)
wrote a good deal of criticism; his combative temperament supplying the
impulse, and his journalist experience the means.[877]

But of the nearly half-score volumes[878] in which this criticism has
been collected, perhaps only one, _Le Roman Expérimental_,[879] is much
worth re-reading; at any rate, it will give us quite sufficient
“document” here. Issued at the very culminating-point of its author’s
talent and popularity, in 1880, long after he had come through the
struggles of his youth, and long before he had fallen into that
condition of a naturalist and anti-theistic _voyant_ which we find in
_Travail_ and _Vérité_, it is thoroughly characteristic, thoroughly
equipped. There is no reason, if the author had had the same talent for
criticism that he had (after making all allowances) for creation, why it
should not display as much power in the one direction as the nearly
contemporary _Attaque du Moulin_ does in the other.

[Sidenote: Le Roman Expérimental.]

Not to mince matters (and waste time in the mincing), it does nothing of
the sort: but, on the contrary, proves that he had next to no critical
aptitude. The contention of the title-paper—that the exploits of M. Zola
and his friends in fiction correspond to those of Claude Bernard in
physics, supported as it is by extensive quotation and adaptation of the
famous vivisector’s own words—can, I fear, receive no other epithet than
puerile. The physiologist can, of course, experiment very abundantly.
But how, in the name of transcendentalism and common-sense alike, can
the artist in fiction _experiment_? One artist in fiction did do so
certainly: to wit, the unlucky author of _Sandford and Merton_, who
trained up a little girl that she might become his wife, with the
natural result that she became somebody else’s. _That_ was a _roman
expérimental_, on all-fours with physiological and other experiments, if
you like. Many persons who are entertained at His Majesty’s expense, or
who have stretched His Majesty’s hemp, might also be described as
_romanciers expérimentaux_, and the company could be strengthened from
less sinister sources.

But how can the _writer_ experiment? He can observe, he can experience,
he can (the ambiguous sense of the word is probably the source of M.
Zola’s blunder) analyse, as we call it. But he can never experiment, he
can only imagine. The check of nature and of the actual, the blow of the
quintain if you charge at it and fail, can never be his except in the
metaphorical and transformed sense of “literary” success or failure,
which brings us back to another region altogether. Now “imagination,”
“idealism,” and the like are M. Zola’s abomination, the constant targets
of his ineffectual arrows. He does not see that he is himself using them
all the time to form his subjects, just as he is using the “rhetoric,”
which he abominates equally, to convey his expression.

[Sidenote: _Examples of his criticism._]

Consult other places to fill out M. Zola’s ideas of literature, and they
will be found all of a piece. Read[880] his “Lettre à La Jeunesse,” with
its almost frenzied cry for a literature of _formula_, excluding genius,
excluding individuality, though only to smuggle them in again afterwards
by a backdoor. Read his account (very well done and producing quite the
opposite effect to that which he intends) of the old man of letters, the
man of letters _à la_ Sainte-Beuve, in “L’Argent dans la Littérature,”
and the funny details about royalties and centimes which follow. Read
him on “L’expression personnelle” in the novel—where he is specially
interesting, because with all his talent this is exactly what he himself
had not got. Read him on the famous “Human Document,” where he misses—
misses blindly and obstinately, almost ferociously, with the ferocity of
the man who _will_ not see—the hopeless, the insuperable rejoinder,
“Study your documents as much as you like, but _transform_ the results
of the study before you give them as art.” Read the astonishing
paralogism entitled “La Moralité,” where he excuses the product of
_tacenda_ in literature because _tacenda_ are constantly recurring in
life, and even being inserted in the newspapers which object to them in
fiction. Read his queer reversal of a truth (certainly not too generally
recognised) that Naturalism is only Romanticism “drawn to the dregs”—“le
Romantisme est la période initiale et troublé du Naturalisme.” And read
above all, in another of the papers, generally headed “De la Critique,”
the monumental, fatal sentence, “Balzac, qui avait pour Walter Scott une
admiration _difficile à concevoir aujourd’hui_.”[881]

He has said it. _Not_—let it be also said and underlined with all the
emphasis possible, that M. Zola—that anybody—is to be put out of court
because he does not admire Scott. We may be extremely sorry for him; we
may think him _quoad hoc_ utterly wrong; but he can plead the old
privilege. He likes what he can—what he does like: and there is no more
to be said. But if he cannot understand why Balzac (whom he himself
admires for certain, not for all, of his qualities) should have admired
an author whom he himself does not admire, because his qualities are
different—_then_ he shows himself at once to be destitute of the primal
and necessary organ of criticism—the organ which appreciates, which at
any rate comprehends and admits the appreciation of, things that are
different. He is even as those Neo-classics, who could not understand
how anybody could admire what was not like Virgil, or like something
else, as the case might be. He has cut the ground from under his own
feet, thrown up his own charter and passport. He cannot object if he be
bound hand and foot and carried into the outer darkness, where La Harpe
is Minos and M. Nisard Rhadamanthus, with the third place on the
infernal bench left vacant for the reader to fill at his pleasure.

[Sidenote: _The reasons of his critical incompetency._]

The truth, I think, of it all is, that M. Zola, though in his way a
rather great man of not the best kind of letters, knew nothing
critically about literature, and did not even take any real interest in
it. I do not know that it has been generally remarked, but I am sure
that if any one who is familiar with the enormous stretch of the novels
will exert his memory, he will find an almost unexampled absence of
literary reference, literary allusion, literary flavour in them. Even
Dickens is not to be named in this respect beside Zola. Nay, his very
critical works themselves, though they deal with books, have nothing of
the book-atmosphere about them. When a man is really saturated with
literature, he carries the aroma of it with him like a violet or a piece
of Russian leather (less complimentary comparisons can be added at the
taste and pleasure of the reader). He cannot dissociate himself from it
if he would: just as another cannot attain it, however hard he pretends.
When M. Zola read books it seems generally to have been to coach up his
documents and his details: indeed, why should a person who despised
poetry and rhetoric read them for anything else? Given this ignorance or
this want of appetite, given a consuming desire to philosophise,
combined with a very weak logical faculty, an intense belief in one
formula or set of formulas, and a highly combative temperament, and you
get a set of conditions which even M. Hennequin might admit as
sufficient to turn out or account for a personage nothing if not
_un_critical.

[Sidenote: “_Les Deux Goncourt._”]

The state of his friends, the MM. de Goncourt, was not much more
gracious; but though they were even more influential, as holding up the
general critical doctrine and practice of naturalist-impressionism, they
have left very little direct criticism, and what they have is of art
rather than of letters. They too seem to have read not much _belles
lettres_. The elder brother, towards the very end of his days (when, by
the way, he thought that Shakespeare _manque d’imagination_), discovered
with much interest that there had been a man named Defoe who was a
considerable Realist or Naturalist, and that _M. Maspero_ had hit upon a
remarkably interesting story about one Rhampsinitus. Their general
principle—that all literature (they, like so many moderns who cannot
write poetry, thought that prose had quite superseded it) should consist
of direct personal observation clothed in deliberately and jealously
“personal” expression—may be dealt with later. Of individual
applications of it, the most attractive is Edmond’s quarrel with
Flaubert because _he_, with all his labour, hit only on “the epithets of
all the world _in excelsis_,”[882] while “we” achieved the “personal”
epithets. From which it will appear that our old friend, Miss
Edgeworth’s Frederick, when he called his hat by the extremely personal
epithet of “cadwallader,” had finished the art of literature, had
sounded the depths and scaled the heights of possible writing.

[Sidenote: _“Scientific criticism”: Hennequin._]

One of the objections—and not the least forcible—to philosophising too
much, in æsthetic matters as in others, is at the “too much” always
begets a too much more; it is like the Hybris of Greek dramatics. Some
might have thought that Nisard, with his ideal French genius, and still
more Taine, with his all-pervading law of place and time and
circumstance, would have satisfied every normal craving for “scientific”
criticism: some even that the results of their practice were sufficient
to warn any reasonable person off such things. But to think this would
have been to ignore humanity and history. Towards the end of the
penultimate decade of the century a young and energetic critic, M. Émile
Hennequin, fluttered the dove-cotes (or hawk’s eyries) of criticism with
a still further straitening of the method, by the promulgation of what
he was pleased to term _esthopsychology_. His career was cut prematurely
short:[883] and, as the experienced had foreseen, “esthopsychology” soon
followed—if it did not even accompany—him to the grave. But it made some
noise for a time: and the three volumes,[884] which he issued in three
successive years, will always remain a curiosity of criticism if not
much more; while his attempt, foredoomed as it was, is, will be, to
failure, is sure to be renewed. It was duly pointed out at the time that
when “esthopsychological” criticism proceeded most closely on its own
lines it was usually bad criticism, and that when it was good criticism
its methods were not distinguishable from those of other kinds. This is
true; but there is something more to be said.

Let us do M. Hennequin the justice to admit at once that he separated
his new science from strictly literary criticism, and adjusted
literature itself in an entirely peculiar and novel attitude and garb,
before he subjected it to his own processes of pathological experiment.
“Literary work,” according to him,[885] is “a collection of written
signs intended to produce non-active emotions”: and of course in the
country where, and for the people to whom, it is this, all sorts of
peculiar phenomena may arise. In that country we can quite understand
that they regard individuality as an _influence perturbatrice_,—a nasty,
impudent, interfering baggage that upsets formulas, and brings your sum
all wrong just when you have got it symmetrically arranged in the
ciphering book. But those who consider individuality as the source and
soul of genius, the only begetter of poetry, the incomparable companion,
patron, voucher of great Art—what part or lot can _they_ have with the
esthopsychologists? A sort of slender snow-bridge across the crevasse
may show itself when we come to the doctrine that, in order to
understand a book, you must analyse its effect on the reader as well as
the evidences it gives of its own originating causes and purposes in the
author; but then, as was pointed out in the antithesis above cited,
there is nothing new in this:—we are back again with Longinus, nay, with
Aristotle. And we speedily discover that the other side of this bridge
is a place to which we do not even wish to get, though the proceedings
of the inhabitants are sometimes rather funny at a distance.

An enormous tabular scheme of conditioning and distinguishing
circumstances, characteristics, means, effects, &c., has first to be
arranged. The sea as a place is _b_: something more complicated is
“_daxxx_,” and so on. You compose your formula for Hugo by the help of
thus symbolising his Mystery, his Grandiosity, and a good many other
things, including the fact (not a fact by any means) that he had in 1888
only one disciple in England—to wit, Mr Swinburne. You study Dickens,
Heine, Tourguénieff, and Poe in this way as _Écrivains Francisés_,
others as _Écrivains Français_. And what is the result? Dickens has much
“sensibility”; Hugo is “antithetic”; the Goncourts rather draw than
write; M. Huysmans affects sensational colour; Panurge is an incarnation
of the ancient French character. “Après avoir fait l’analyse du
vocabulaire, de la syntaxe, de la métrique, de la composition de
Flaubert, nous avons examiné ses procédés de description et de
psychologie qui se reduisent à ceux—[the reader doubtless expects
something new and startling]—du réalisme”! These “secrets of Punch,”
these “truths of M. de La Palisse,” simply pullulate in M. Hennequin’s
pages. We travel painfully from Dan to Beersheba, and from Beersheba
through all the wildernesses to the uttermost parts of the sea; we
accumulate the most elaborate implements, provisions, documents of
travel that the shops can furnish or our ingenuity invent: we spend
months and years in painful prospecting. And we bring home exactly the
same conclusions which have been written on the walls of every house in
the intellectual Israel for Heaven knows how many years. Much μόχθος
περισσὸς has been seen in this story: some (though I should demur) would
have it to be a history—and an example—of nothing else. But labour more
utterly lost than “esthopsychology” I think we have not found, and shall
not find, even here.

[Sidenote: _“Comparative Literature”: Texte._]

About ten years later Fate again cut short the life of an industrious
and promising critic in M. Joseph Texte. I received, from personal
friends of M. Texte, such golden accounts of his character and
abilities, and the purpose to which he devoted his too short life-work—
that of the study of “Comparative Literature”—is so much that to which I
have devoted my own much more extended if not quite unhampered
opportunities,— that I should like to say nothing of him but good. His
last title, _La Littérature Comparée_, sums up the drift of critical and
literary-historical thought for the last hundred and fifty years, and
especially for the last hundred. As we have seen, from the time of
Bodmer and Breitinger in Germany, from that of Gray in England, from
that of Diderot, if not even earlier, in France, it has always been this
extended and comparative study which has corrected criticism. But it was
not till the nineteenth century was pretty far advanced that the
practice of Sainte-Beuve, and a little later the formal doctrine of Mr
Arnold, recognised and, as it were, canonised the idea; while it is only
within the last twenty or five-and-twenty years that it has been largely
carried out, and only within the last decade or less that it has
received regular academic and other sanction. I have never myself, since
I began to study literature seriously almost forty years ago, had the
slightest doubt about its being not only the _via prima_, but the _via
sola_ of literary safety.

But literary roads are never quite “royal” in the sense of the proverb:
there are always obstacles and breaches in the way, as well as
possibilities of mistaking it. Especially, as it seems to me, is the
student of Comparative Literature exposed to the old temptation of
generalising and abstracting too much. I think that M. Texte’s first,
and perhaps best known book, _Rousseau et les Origines du
Cosmopolitanisme Littéraire_,[886] is rather an example of this. It will
be observed that the very title hurries us a long way to sea—that we are
almost out of sight of the firm land of individual example-study. If you
have been brought up solely on the drama of Racine and are introduced to
that of Shakespeare—nay, even _vice versa_, though not to the same
extent—it is almost impossible that the contrast should not do you good,
if only by forcing you to distinguish—to give your reasons, not to “like
grossly.” But “Literary Cosmopolitanism”[887]? is not this a very
distant and very vague City of God? is it not even something of a
Nephelococcygia? It has never existed except to some extent during the
Middle Ages: there is no present sign of its ever being likely to exist.
And the coupling of it with Rousseau excites other apprehensions.
Rousseau was a Swiss; he lived in France, Italy, England: his works were
popular all over Europe. There _is_ an air—but an almost obviously false
air—of cosmopolitanism about this. When we examine the actual book we
find that, practically, it consists of a summary of the chief literary
_rapports_ between France and England before Rousseau; of an ingenious
attempt[888] to make Rousseau himself out as a kind of unconscious
apostle of universal principles of literary criticism: and then of some
remarks on the further _rapports_ of English and French after him.
“Rousseau and the Relations of English and French Literature” would be
the real title of the book: and a useful enough monograph it is. The
_Études de Littérature Européenne_ are better (the studies of Keats and
Browne are very good), and the _Littérature Comparée_ interesting. But
M. Texte was always too heedless of the guile that lurks in generals—
literary more than of any other kind. The “Descendants of the Lakists in
France” really means little more than that Wordsworth exercised a
considerable influence on Sainte-Beuve: and “The German Influence in
France” is either a quite unmanageably large subject, or a mere
disproportion of nut and kernel. It is very dangerous to take, as an
example of “contemporary” English literature, at the end of the
nineteenth century, _Aurora Leigh_, which merely represents a brief and
passing phase between the first Reform Bill and the first Exhibition.
But nothing is further from my wishes than to carp and cavil at M.
Texte, who in an average lifetime must have made vast and valuable
progress, and who, as it is, was a valiant pioneer in a great and
effectual way.

[Sidenote: _Academic Criticism: Gaston Paris._]

To pass or recur to criticism of a strictly academic character, it is
much easier to be impartial in judgment of an enemy than of a friend.
And, but for one thing, I fear I might be bribed in favour of M. Gaston
Paris by the extraordinary liberality and indulgence which, without any
private introduction or intercession, he showed, some twenty years ago,
towards an attempt on the subject in which he was the unquestioned
authority and master—an attempt which did not follow his own or any
other leading, which to his expert eyes must have been full of blunders
and shortcomings, and which could have had in those eyes no merit but
that of being honest, and based on first-hand study. Even this would not
have conciliated everybody. But M. Paris had nothing of the dog who
growls when any one approaches _his_ bone, and it was most interesting
to watch in _Romania_, the periodical which he helped to direct for more
than thirty years, the difference of his method and that of some of his
coadjutors. One could only marvel at his perfect freedom from this
_lues_ of the mere scholar.

This equity or urbanity, however, though the most pleasing to persons
who experienced it, was not the only nor perhaps the chief, it was
certainly not the most purely literary, excellence of M. Paris as a
critic. He had another, still rarer in the philologist—the faculty of
appreciating literature. His philological and other conscientiousness,
indeed, prevented him from reprinting—during long years in which all
students of Old French coveted it—the delightful _Histoire Poétique de
Charlemagne_, with which (in 1865-66) he began his literary career: and
most of his time was spent on lectures, editions, and miscellaneous work
in the periodical just mentioned and others. But many of his _Romania_
Essays (which we may hope will be collected) display the rare union just
mentioned, as the work of few other philologists in the older modern
tongues has done throughout Europe, though the late Professor Kölbing
came an honourable second in Germany. And in 1885 he actually collected,
under the title of _Poésie du Moyen Age_, some of his more popular
lectures on the title-subject, on the origins of French Literature, on
“La Chanson de Roland et La Nationalité Française” (a fine piece,
delivered _crânement_, as his students might have said, in beleaguered
Paris, during the central December of the Année Terrible), on the quaint
semi-comic epic of Charlemagne’s Pilgrimage, on the story of Parnell’s
_Hermit_, on his father. Some years later he gave an excellent but too
brief _Manual of Mediæval French Literature_: and in 1896 he published a
very noteworthy collection of articles, obituary and other, on modern
men of letters, entitled _Penseurs et Poètes_. The longest and most
remarkable of these is on the poet, M. Sully Prudhomme—a lifelong
friend—and it shows better than anything else M. Paris’s power of pure
literary criticism in subjects far distant in character as in time from
those in which his hand usually dealt. I do not agree with him here; I
cannot rank his subject’s estimable and faultless, but rather cold and
limited, poetic gift so highly as he did. But for careful investigation
and grouping of results, for delicate arrangement of merits so that they
may produce the best effect, for good taste in enthusiasm, and
ingenuity, never unfair, in advocacy, the article will stand comparison
with one of Sainte-Beuve’s at his most interested and good-natured, or
one of Montégut’s at his least discursive and protracted.

[Sidenote: _Caro_, _Taillandier_, &c.]

The number of learned or academic critics—some older, some younger—who
might be grouped round or arranged after M. Paris is of course very
large: but I do not know any who combined his special accomplishment
with his general literary quality. Long ago, in another place, I was
guilty of introducing two of the class as “M. Saint-René Taillandier, a
dull man of industry, and M. Caro, a man of industry who is not dull.”
Neither, alas! “is” anything now: but a renewed and special study of
their work for the purposes of this book does not induce me to tone down
the flippancy. Still, it is fair to say that neither seems to have
intended what we call here “pure literary criticism.” Caro[889] was (and
was satirised rather unjustly as such, in a comedy famous in its day) a
sort of ladies’ philosopher, a moralist in kid gloves and dress clothes.
Taillandier (the “Saint-René” appears to be one of the usual
self-embellishments) was in the same way a historian and political
student, who, in his capacity as regular contributor to the _Deux
Mondes_, attempted a great deal of literary work, and collected a good
deal of it.[890] He had little grasp or suppleness: and retained a great
deal of the old academic horror of the bizarre. A review by him of
Flaubert’s _Éducation Sentimentale_ was, I think, the particular _locus_
which convinced me of his dulness: and I have never read anything which
removed the impression.[891]

[Sidenote: _The “Light Horsemen”: Janin._]

Of what may be called the light horsemen of French criticism, almost any
one, with even the slightest knowledge of the subject, would at once
name Jules Janin as the hetman. He was very early singled out by Nisard
in his attack on la _littérature facile_;[892] and though he replied
with all the wit, style, and facility itself for which he was justly
renowned, he probably—or rather certainly—knew as well as anybody else
that it was easier to counter-raid the enemy’s country than to defend
his own. A “prince of criticism,” as he was called (and is said to have
liked to call himself, with the mixture of self-deceit and self-satire
which all men of some brains know), he hardly was: a prince of
journalism he was most certainly. Of his purely literary exercises in
the art practically nothing survives; his early romantic extravagances
in novel kind, _L’Âne Mort_ and _Barnave_, have outlasted them, while
themselves possessing no very solid fame. His purely theatrical
criticisms are said to be of some value as _points de repère_. But, on
the whole, if the most brilliant of journalists, he was also the most of
a journalist among brilliant men of letters. His appreciations were
written with all that appetising _à peu près_—that dash and sparkle and
apparent mastery—which, more than any solid qualities, have given French
criticism its reputation with those who do not know. But they represent
little real knowledge on the writer’s own part: and while destitute of
any theory of criticism of the more abstract kind (which they might lack
and be no worse for it), they display no standard of personal taste, no
test of goodness drawn from comparative experience, to supply the place
of such a theory. They had their day; but they have ceased to be.

[Sidenote: _Pontmartin._]

It might have been scarcely safe to class M. Armand de Pontmartin with
the light horse during his lifetime; he would at any rate, in all
probability, have taken care to show that light horsemen not only do not
belong to the non-combatant divisions of an army, but are one of its
most formidable arms of offence and defence. The extreme voluminousness
(he reprinted some fifty or sixty volumes of his _Samedis_ and other
work) of this Royalist critic; the sharpness of his tongue, especially
in a book entitled _Les Jeudis de Madame Charbonneau_, which fluttered
literary critics in the middle years of the Second Empire; and the fact
that Sainte-Beuve took the field against him on more than one occasion,
have created, I believe, rather an unfavourable impression. This is not
quite fair. M. de Pontmartin wrote, or at least republished, too much;
he was too generally under the influence of splenetic partisanship in
more than one kind, and there was in his criticism a certain
superficiality and tendency to gossip round a subject, whether in attack
or in caress, rather than to grasp and penetrate it. But he had great
acuteness, wrote an admirable French style of the older and purer kind,
and certainly had no reason to be ashamed of the way in which he
harassed the “Naturalists” in his later years of contribution to the
_Gazette de France_. The other publications of these years[893] show a
mellowing of temper and no loss of ability: while even in the earlier
_Samedis_ a great number of true things, well put, may be found.

[Sidenote: _Veuillot._]

But the most formidable of French critical Pandours—a man of genius in
his own way, and the inspirer in that way of no small or inconspicuous
divisions of journalism in other countries and since his own time—was
Louis Veuillot. Most of his “swashbuckler” writing—to do him justice he
did not merely swash the buckler, but had a right swashing blow with the
sword at his enemy’s face and body—was directed to religious and
political matters. But he had a real interest in literature: and though
his principles, as Extreme Right and Extreme Left principles generally
do, allowed and indeed encouraged him to regard no blow as foul in their
service, he is perhaps less unscrupulous in administering literary
sensations[894] than in dealing out others.

The twelve solid volumes of his _Mélanges_,[895] despite the apparently
ephemeral character of many of their subjects, are still excellent
reading, especially for the judicious student who knows how to skip, and
does not disdain to do so now and then. Even when Veuillot raises false
issues he is seldom quite negligible; and when he is in sympathy with
his subject he is sometimes extraordinarily happy; while one seldom or
never detects in him the note of personal spite, or the mere pedantic
snarling, which, as has been said, are the unpardonable sins of
criticism.

It might surprise some people who have heard of Veuillot only as a
tomahawk-and-black-flag critic to read the affectionate and admirably
executed eulogy of Edouard Ourliac, at iv. 580 of the second series;
until Sainte-Beuve went out of his way to offend the Clericals, Veuillot
appreciated him; and even in regard to Hugo, his handling (at ii. 542 of
the second series) is astonishingly clever. Further, Veuillot is very
seldom silly: one of the few instances I can think of, is his attack on
Sainte-Beuve and Rabelais. It is never quite easy to understand what
there is in Master Francis which upsets and disorganises even the most
intelligent Roman Catholic critics, and the fact is one of the heaviest
charges against the Roman form of Catholicism, from the literary point
of view. Of poetry, Veuillot had not much sense; one would hardly expect
it in him, and it is certain that his doctrine, that a great poet must
sing _ni sa dame, ni la dame d’autrui, ni les dames de tout le monde_,
would, if it were carried out universally, make poetry extremely
uninteresting. He could be vulgar, as in his attack on Edmond About (at
v. 372 of the second series), but then it has to be remembered that
About could be and was extremely vulgar himself, and that the greatest
danger of this sort of rough-and-tumble journalism is that you are too
apt to accept the weapons and the methods of the adversary.

[Sidenote: _Not so black as, &c._]

We have little space for “Mr Bludyer” in this book, and therefore it is
that I have given some to his greatest and most gifted representative in
the flesh during our time. One may think indeed—I do—that Mr Bludyer is
a very unnecessary evil,—that it is perfectly possible to fight as
keenly and as stanchly as you like with the pen, and yet never write
otherwise than fairly, honestly, and like a gentleman. But whether Mr
Bludyer must come or not, he generally does; and when he does, it would
be well if he always had the wits, and the raciness, and, on the whole,
the freedom from mere dirty selfish vanities and jealousies and greeds,
which characterised the redoubtable and notorious author of the _Odeurs
de Paris_.

[Sidenote: _The present._]

It is half pleasant and half unpleasant to conclude this notice of
French criticism with only a reference to those distinguished living
representatives of it who hold up its banner and spread its sails to all
the winds of the spirit. To name no juniors, I have already had more
than one occasion to refer to the great erudition, the remarkable
acuteness, and the practised critical method of M. Ferdinand Brunetière.
These qualities, with an agreeable and sufficient difference, appear
also in M. Émile Faguet: while M. Anatole France illustrates a more
strictly impressionist, and a lighter kind of our office with one of the
most charming styles that any living European writer uses for the
pleasure of the human race; and there are many who greatly admire the
wit, the alertness, and the truly Gallic nonchalance of M. Jules
Lemaître. They have all written for some considerable time: may they put
on none but Academic immortality for at least as much longer!




                              CHAPTER II.

                     BETWEEN COLERIDGE AND ARNOLD.

THE ENGLISH CRITICS OF 1830-60—WILSON—STRANGE MEDLEY OF HIS CRITICISM—
    THE ‘HOMER’ AND THE OTHER LARGER CRITICAL COLLECTIONS—THE ‘SPENSER’—
    THE ‘SPECIMENS OF BRITISH CRITICS’—‘DIES BOREALES’—FAULTS IN ALL,
    AND IN THE REPUBLISHED WORK—DE QUINCEY: HIS ANOMALIES AND
    PERVERSITIES AS A CRITIC, IN REGARD TO ALL LITERATURES—THEIR CAUSES—
    THE ‘RHETORIC’ AND THE ‘STYLE’—HIS COMPENSATIONS—LOCKHART—DIFFICULTY
    OF APPRAISING HIS CRITICISM—THE ‘TENNYSON’ REVIEW—ON COLERIDGE,
    BURNS, SCOTT, AND HOOK—HIS GENERAL CRITICAL CHARACTER—HARTLEY
    COLERIDGE—FORLORN CONDITION OF HIS CRITICISM—ITS QUALITY—DEFECTS AND
    EXAMPLES—MAGINN—HIS PARODY-CRITICISMS AND MORE SERIOUS EFFORTS—
    MACAULAY—HIS EXCEPTIONAL COMPETENCE IN SOME WAYS—THE EARLY ARTICLES—
    HIS DRAWBACKS—THE PRACTICAL CHOKING OF THE GOOD SEED—HIS LITERARY
    SURVEYS IN THE ‘LETTERS’—HIS CONFESSION—THE ‘ESSAYS’—SIMILAR
    DWINDLING IN CARLYLE—THE EARLIER ‘ESSAYS’—THE LATER—THE ATTITUDE OF
    THE ‘LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS’—THE CONCLUSION OF THIS MATTER—THACKERAY—
    HIS ONE CRITICAL WEAKNESS AND EXCELLENCE—‘BLACKWOOD,’ IN 1849, ON
    TENNYSON—GEORGE BRIMLEY—HIS ESSAY ON TENNYSON—HIS OTHER WORK—HIS
    INTRINSIC AND CHRONOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE—“GYAS AND CLOANTHUS”—MILMAN,
    CROKER, HAYWARD—SYDNEY SMITH, SENIOR, HELPS—ELWIN, LANCASTER,
    HANNAY—DALLAS—THE ‘POETICS‘—‘THE GAY SCIENCE’—OTHERS: J. S. MILL.


There are few things more difficult to the conscientious writer, and few
which he knows will receive so little consideration from the
irresponsible reader, as those overlappings on the one hand, and
throwings-back on the other, which are incumbent on all literary
historians save those who are content to abjure form and method
altogether. The constituents of the present chapter give a case in
point. Some of them may seem unreasonably torn away from their natural
companions in our last chapter dealing with English criticism; some
unreasonably kept back from the society of the next. But, once more,
things have not been done entirely at the hazard of the orange-peel or
the die.

[Sidenote: _The English Critics of 1830-60._]

There is, to the present writer at any rate, a distinct colour, or set
of colours, appertaining to most of the English criticism of 1830-1860,
and it seems worth while to bring this out by isolating its
practitioners to a certain extent. We shall find these falling under
three main divisions—the first containing the latest-writing, and in
some cases hardly the least, of the great band of periodical critics,
mostly Romantic in tendency, of whom Coleridge is the Generalissimo and
Hazlitt the rather mutinous Chief of the Staff. Then come the mighty
pair of Carlyle and Macaulay; and then a rear-guard of more or less
interesting minors and transition persons. So, first of the first, let
us deal with one who, not only to his special partisans and friends,
seemed a very prince of critics in his day.

[Sidenote: _Wilson._]

The difficulties of appraising “Christopher North” as a critic are, or
should be, well known in general; but it is doubtful whether many
persons have recently cared to put themselves in a position to
appreciate them directly. No such revival has come to him as that which
has come to Hazlitt: and I have elsewhere given at some length[896] the
reasons which make me inclined to fear that no such revival is very
likely to come soon. For Wilson accumulated, with a defiance valorous
enough but certainly not discreet, provocation after provocation to
Nemesis and Oblivion. He is immensely diffuse; he is not more diffuse
than he is desultory; and in the greater part of his work he sets his
criticism with a habitual strain of extravagant and ephemeral _bravura_
which even the most tolerant and catholic may not seldom find
uncongenial. [Sidenote: _Strange medley of his criticism._] But all
this, though bad, is followed by things worse—critical incivility of the
worst kind, violent political and other partisanship, a prevailing
capriciousness which makes his critical utterances almost valueless,
except as words to the wise; and occasional accesses of detraction and
vituperation which suggest either the exasperation or some physical
ailment, or a slight touch of mental aberration. And yet, side by side
with all this, there is an enthusiastic love of literature; a very wide
knowledge of it; a real capacity for judging, wherever this capacity is
allowed to exercise itself; a generosity (as in the famous palinodes to
Leigh Hunt and to Macaulay) which only makes one regret the more keenly
that this generosity is so Epimethean; and, lastly, a faculty of phrase
which, irregular and uncertain as it is, apt as it is to fall on one
side into bombast and on the other into bathos, is almost always
extraordinary. An anthology of critical passages might be extracted from
Wilson which few critics could hope to surpass; but the first and
probably the last exclamation of any one who was driven by this to the
contexts would be, “How on earth could such good taste live in company
with a Siamese brother so hopelessly bad!”[897]

[Sidenote: _The_ Homer _and the other larger critical collections_.]

Wilson’s admirers, from his daughter downwards, have lamented that the
_Homer_—a good thing but not his best—was the only one of his longer and
more connected critical exercitations that was included[898] in his
collected works, while three others—the _Spenser_, the _Specimens of
British Critics_, and the dialogue _Dies Boreales_—were excluded. The
reasons of the exclusion seem obvious enough. At a rough and
unprofessional “cast-off,” I should guess each of the two earlier series
at about 300 of these present pages, and the _Dies_ at nearer 400. This
would have meant at least another three volumes added to a collection
already consisting of twelve. The Devil’s Advocate, moreover, would have
had other things to urge. Whatever Wilson had gained by age and sobering
(and he had gained much), he had lost nothing of his tendency to
exuberance and expatiation. After the first paper or two, the whole of
the _Spenser_ criticism is occupied with an examination of the First
Book of the _Faerie Queene_ only—the best known part of the poem. The
_Specimens of British Critics_—an admirable title which might have
served for a most novel, useful, and interesting work—means in fact a
very copious examination of Dryden’s critical utterances and a rather
copious one of those of Pope—so that this _professor_ at any rate has
not filled this _hiatus_. And the _Dies_, though they have got rid of
some of the superabundant animal spirits of the _Noctes_, are (it is
necessary to say it) very much duller.

[Sidenote: _The_ Spenser.]

Yet the regretters had some reason. I myself could relinquish without
much sorrow, from the matter actually republished, more than as much as
would accommodate the _Spenser_, nearly as much as would make room for
the _Specimens_ also. As for the former, the famous compliment of
Hallam[899] (not a person likely, either on his good or his bad side, to
be too lenient to Wilson’s faults) is at least a strong prerogative
vote. Nor does it[900] stand in need of this backing. Wilson spends far
too much time in slaying forgotten Satans that never were very Satanic—
the silliness of the excellent Hughes, the pedantry of the no less
excellent Spence, the half-heartedness, even, of Tom Warton. He does not
entirely discard his old horse-play and his old grudges, though we can
well pardon him for the fling that “the late Mr Hazlitt” did not think
Sidney and Raleigh gentlemen. But he discards them to a very great
extent; as well as the old namby-pambiness which sometimes mars his
earlier work, when he is sentimental, and which, with him as with
Landor, was a real danger. And the thing is full of admirable things,—
the generous admission that “Campbell’s criticism is as fine and true as
his poetry”; the victorious defence of the Spenserian stanza against
those who think it a mere following of the Italians: a hundred pieces of
good exposition and appreciation. While as for mere writing, we have
“written fine” after De Quincey and Wilson himself for some eighty
years. But have we often beaten this: “Thus here are many elegies in
one; but that one [_Daphnaida_] is as much a whole as the _sad_ sky with
all its _misty_ stars”?[901]

[Sidenote: _The_ Specimens of British Critics.]

The _Specimens of British Critics_,[902] ten years later, maintains, and
even with rare exceptions improves, the standard of taste in the
_Spenser_, but its faults of disproportion, irrelevance, and divagation
are much greater. The author himself once insinuates that his work may
be taken for “an irregular history of British Criticism,” and it
certainly might have been made such—“nor so very irregular neither,” as
they would have said in the days when Englishmen were allowed to write
English, and grammarians to prate about grammar. But Wilson cannot
resist his propensity to course any hare that starts. As has been said
above, he has the compass of a by no means meagre volume for dealing
ostensibly with no British critics but Dryden and Pope. If he dealt with
them only, and only as critics, there would not be much fault to find,
though we might wish for a better and fuller planned work. But not a
quarter—not, we might almost venture to say, a tenth—of his space is
occupied with them or with criticism. A very large part is given to
discussion, not merely of Dryden and Pope but of Churchill as
_satirists_; Dryden’s plays, rhymed and other, receive large
consideration, his theory of translation almost a larger, with
independent digressions on every poet whom he translates. Two or three
whole papers are devoted to Chaucer, not merely as Dryden translated him
but in all his works, in his versification, and so forth. I do not
wonder that, seeing a farrago so utterly non-correspondent to its title,
any one should have hesitated to reprint it. But I do know that there is
admirable criticism scattered all over it, that if it appeared as
_Miscellanies in English Criticism_, or _Critical Quodlibeta_, or
something of that sort, it would be worth the while of every one who
takes an interest in the subject to read it: and I do think it a pity
that it should be practically as if it were not.

[Sidenote: Dies Boreales.]

Perhaps hardly as much can be said of _Dies Boreales_,[903] which was
written when the author’s bodily strength was breaking, and which
betrays a relapse on senescent methods, with, naturally, no relief of
juvenile treatment. The dialogue form is resumed, but “Seward,”
“Buller,” and “Tallboys” are, as Dryden might have said, “the coolest
and most insignificant” fellows, the worst possible substitutes for
“Tickler,” and the Shepherd, and the wonderful _eidolon_ of De Quincey
in the _Noctes_. There is no gusto in the descriptions, even of Loch
Awe: and among the rare and melancholy flashes of the old genial
tomfoolery, the representation of a banquet at which these thin things,
these walking gentlemen, sit down with the ghost of Christopher to a
banquet of _twenty-five_ weighed pounds of food per man, is but ghastly
and resurrectionist Rabelaisianism. But if there is not the old
exuberance, there is the old pleonasm. Wilson seems unable to settle
down to what is his real subject—critical discussion of certain plays of
Shakespeare and of _Paradise Lost_. Nor, when the discussions come, are
they quite of the first class, though there are good things in them. The
theory of a “double time” in Shakespeare—one literal and chronological,
which is often very short, and another extended by poetical licence—is
ingenious, if somewhat fantastic, and, critically, quite unnecessary.
But the main faults of the writer, uncompensated for the most part by
his merits, are eminently here.

[Sidenote: _Faults in all,_]

These faults, to be particularised immediately, result in a lack of
directness, method, clean and clear critical grip, which is continuous
and pervading. Forty pages could generally be squeezed into fourteen,
and not seldom into four, with great gain of critical, no loss of
literary, merit. Now diffuseness, a bad fault everywhere, is an
absolutely fatal one in critical literature that wishes to live. It is
hard enough for it to gain the ear of posterity anyhow; it is simply
impossible when the real gist of the matter is whelmed in oceans of
divagation, of skirmishes, courteous or rough-and-tumble, with other
critics, of fantastic flourish and fooling. It is no blasphemy to the
_Poetics_ and the Περὶ Ὕψους themselves to say that to their terseness
they owe at least half their immortality.

[Sidenote: _and in the republished work._]

In the earlier, better known, and more easily accessible work the same
merits and defects appear in brighter or darker colours, as the case may
be. In once more going through the ten volumes of the _Noctes_,[904] and
the _Recreations_, and the _Essays_, I can find nothing more
representative than the Wordsworth Essay,[905] the famous onslaught on
Tennyson’s early Poems,[906] and the eulogy of Macaulay’s _Lays_,[907]
though I should now add _An Hour’s Talk about Poetry_ from the
_Recreations_.[908] In the first the author tries to be systematic, and
fails; in the second he is jovially scornful, not without some acute and
generous appreciation; in the third he is enthusiastically appreciative,
but not, on the whole, critically satisfactory; in the fourth he
compasses English sea and land to find one Great Poem, and finds it only
in _Paradise Lost_. Everywhere he is alive and full of life; in most
places he is suggestive and stimulating at intervals; nowhere is he
critically to be depended upon. Praise and blame; mud and incense;
vision and blindness alike lack that interconnection, that “central
tiebeam,” which Carlyle, in one of the least unsympathetic and most
clear-sighted of his criticisms of his contemporaries, denied him. The
leaves are not merely—are not indeed at all—Sibylline; for it is
impossible to work them into, or to believe that they were ever inspired
by, a continuous and integral thought or judgment. There is enjoyment on
the reader’s part, as on the writer’s, but it is “casual fruition”:
there is even reasoning, but it is mostly on detached and literally
eccentric issues. A genial chaos: but first of all, and, I fear, last of
all, chaotic.

[Sidenote: _De Quincey: his anomalies_]

Wilson’s neighbour, friend, contributor, and, in a kindly fashion,
half-butt, De Quincey[909] is, like Southey, though in different
measure, condition, and degree, rather puzzling as a critic. He, too,
had enormous reading, a keen interest in literature, and a distinctly
critical temperament. Moreover, during great part of his long life, he
never had any motive for writing on subjects that did not please him:
and, even when such a motive existed, he seems to have paid sublimely
little attention to it. The critical “places” in his works are in fact
very numerous; they meet the reader almost _passim_, and often seem to
promise substantive and important contributions to criticism. Nor, as a
matter of fact, are they ever quite negligible or often unimportant.
They constantly have that stimulating and attractive property which is
so valuable, and which seems so often to have been acquired by “the
Companions” from contact with the loadstone-rock of Coleridge. Every now
and then, as in the well-known “Note on the Knocking at the Gate in
_Macbeth_,” De Quincey will display evidence (whether original or
suggested) of almost dæmonic subtlety. Very often, indeed, he will
display evidence, if not of dæmonic yet of impish and almost fiendish
acuteness, as in his grim and (for a fellow artificial-Paradise seeker)
rather callous suggestion[910] that Coleridge and Lamb should have put
down their loss of cheerfulness in later years not to opium or to gin
but to the later years themselves. “Ah, dear Lamb,” says the little
monster,[911] “but note that the drunkard was fifty-six years old and
the songster twenty-three!”

[Sidenote: _and perversities as a critic,_]

Yet De Quincey is scarcely—on the whole, and as a whole—to be ranked
among the greatest critics. To begin with, his unconquerable habit of
“rigmarole” is constantly leading him astray: and the taste for jaunty
personality which he had most unluckily imbibed from Wilson leads him
astray still further, and still more gravely and damagingly. In the
volume on _The Lake Poets_ I do not suppose that there are twenty pages
of pure criticism, putting all orts and scraps together. The main really
critical part of the essay on Lamb—then a fresh and most tempting
subject—is a criticism of—--Hazlitt! The extremely interesting subject
of “Milton _v._ Southey and Landor” (though the paper does contain good
things, and, in particular, some excellent remarks on Metre) is all
frittered and whittled off into shavings of quip, and crank, and gibe,
and personality. The same is the case with what should have been, and in
part is, one of his best critical things, the article on Schlosser’s
_Literary History of the Eighteenth Century_. The present writer will
not be suspected, by friend or foe, of insisting ruthlessly on a too
grave and chaste critical manner: but De Quincey here is too much for
anything and anybody. “For Heaven’s sake, my good man,” one may say
almost in his own words, “do leave off fooling and come to business.” In
the very long essay on Bentley he has little or no criticism at all; and
here, as well as in the “Cicero,” he is too much stung and tormented by
his hatred of the drab style of Conyers Middleton to see anything else
when he gets near to that curious person, as he must in both. On Keats,
without any reason for hostility, he has almost the full inadequacy of
his generation, with not much less on Shelley; and when he comes to talk
even of Wordsworth’s _poetry_, though there was no one living whom he
honoured more, he is not very much less unsatisfactory.

[Sidenote: _in regard to all literatures._]

Nor are these inadequacies and perversities limited to English. There
was a good excuse (more than at one time people used to think under the
influence of the fervent Goethe-worship of the mid-nineteenth century)
for his famous and furious attack on _Wilhelm Meister_; but what are we
to think of a man (admitting that much has been said and thought of it)
coolly “dismisses,”[912] without so much as an unfavourable opinion, the
lyric and miscellaneous poetry of one of the greatest lyric poets of
Europe, or the world? He persistently belittles French literature: and
he had, of course, a right to give his judgment. But, unfortunately, he
not only does not give evidence of knowledge to support his
condemnation, but does give negative evidence of ignorance. That
ignorance, as far as contemporary literature went, seems to have been
almost absolute. Even Chateaubriand (a rhetorician after his own heart)
he never names in his dealing with French rhetoric, and never at all, so
far as I remember, except as a praiser of Milton; while the subject
before the seventeenth century seems to have been equally a blank to
him. But he is most wayward and most uncritical about the classics. He
gives himself all the airs of a profound scholar, and seems really to
have been a very fair one. Yet that “Appraisal of Greek Literature”
which Professor Masson has ruthlessly resuscitated[913] might almost
have been written by the most ignorant of the “Moderns,” two hundred
years ago, for its omissions and commissions. He seems to have been in
his most Puckish frame of mind if he was not serious; if he was, _actum
est_ (or almost so) with him as a critic.

[Sidenote: _Their causes._]

The truth seems to be that he had no very deep, wide, or fervent love of
poetry as such. He could appreciate single lines and phrases,—Milton’s

              “Sole sitting by the shores of old romance,”

Landor’s

             “Beyond the arrows, views, and shouts of men”;

but on the whole his curious, and of course strictly “interested,”
heresy about prose-poetry made him as lukewarm towards poetry pure and
simple as it made him unjust to the plainer prose, such as that of
Middleton, that of Swift, and even (incomprehensible as this particular
injustice may seem) that of Plato. Yet we should not be sorry for this
heresy, because it gave us, independently of the great creative passages
of the _Confessions_, the _Suspiria_, and the rest, the critical pieces
of the _Rhetoric_ and the _Style_. It is somewhat curious that in the
midst of an appreciative period we should have to fall back upon
“preceptist” work. But it is certainly here that De Quincey, though not
without his insuperable faults, becomes of most consequence in the
History of Criticism. In fact, he may be said to have been almost the
“instaurator”[914] of this preceptist criticism which, since its older
arguments had become nearly useless from the disuse of the Neo-classic
appreciation upon which they were based, or which was based upon them,
very urgently and particularly required such instauration.

[Sidenote: _The_ Rhetoric _and the_ Style.]

The _Rhetoric_ in particular, with all its defects, has not been
superseded as a preceptist canvas, which the capable teacher can broider
and patch into a competent treatise of the ornater English style. Its
author’s unconquerable waywardness appears in his attempt—based in the
most rickety fashion and constantly self-contradictory—to combine the
traditional and the popular senses of the word in a definition of
Rhetoric as _unconvinced_ fine writing,—the deliberate elaboration of
mere _tours de force_ in contradistinction to genuine and heartfelt
Eloquence. But its view is admirably wide—the widest up to its time that
can be found anywhere, I think; it is instinct with a crotchety but
individual life; and if the defects of the new method appear when we
compare it with Rapin or Batteux, the merits thereof appear likewise,
and in ample measure. Nor, despite some digression, is there much of the
author’s too frequent tomfoolery. His erudition, his interest in the
subject, and (towards the end) his genuine and alarmed eagerness to
contradict Whately’s damaging pronouncements as to poetry and prose,
keep him out of this. The _Style_ is much more questionable, and has
much more ephemeral matter in it—the author rides out all his favourite
cock-horses by turns, and will often not bate us a single furlong of the
journey to Banbury Cross on them. Moreover, much of it is occupied with
often just condemnation of the special vices of ordinary English
newspaper-and-book style in the earlier middle nineteenth century—Satans
which, though not quite extinct, have given main place to other
inhabitants of Pandemonium. But the paper, with the subsidiary pieces on
_Language_ and _Conversation_, will never lose interest and importance.

[Sidenote: _His compensations._]

No incident in the ruthless duty of the critical historian has given me
more trouble, or been carried through with more reluctance, than this
handling of De Quincey. I have to acknowledge a great, a very early, and
a constantly continued indebtedness to him. I could, as was hinted at
the beginning of this notice, compile a long and brilliant list of
separate instances in which his old-man-of-the-sea caprices have left
him free to give admirable critical pronouncements. His suggestive and
_protreptic_[915] quality cannot be overrated. On a philosophical point
of criticism he is very rarely wrong, though even here he is too apt to
labour the point, as in his deductions in the _Appraisal_ from the true
and important caution that “sublime” is a defective and delusive word
for the subject of Longinus. But he is of those critics, too commonly to
be found in the present stage of our inquiry, who are eminently
_unsafe_—who require to be constantly surrounded with keepers and
guards. I do not remember that Mr Matthew Arnold often, or ever, refers
to De Quincey. But I cannot help thinking that, in his strictures on the
English critics of his earlier time, he must often have had him in mind.
He could not have charged him with narrow reading. He could not have
charged him with mere insularity, or with flattery of his co-insulars.
But he might easily have produced him,—and it would have been very
difficult to get him out of the Arnoldian clutches, as a victim of that
“eternal enemy of Art, Caprice.”

[Sidenote: _Lockhart._]

There are few critics of whom we have been less allowed to form a
definite and well-grounded opinion, than of one of the most famous of
the practitioners of the art in the first half of the nineteenth
century. Some, I should hope, of the very unjust obloquy which used to
rest on Lockhart for his “scorpion” quality has been removed by Mr
Lang’s _Life_: but of his more than thirty years of criticism not much
more is accessible than what was public the day after his death. It is
true that this—the main articles of it being the _Scott_, the _Burns_,
the _Theodore Hook_, and the earlier _Peter’s Letters_[916]—is a very
goodly literary baggage indeed, and one which any man of letters might
consent to have produced, at the cost of a large curtailment of his
_peau de chagrin_. [Sidenote: _Difficulty of appraising his criticism._]
It is true, further, that great part of it puts Lockhart in the
forefront of the critical army. But its criticism, like the
mousquetaireship of Aramis, is but of an interim order; and of the
necessarily great body of anonymous reviewing, wherein at once the sting
and the strength of his critical powers must have been revealed, we have
but a very few instances even indirectly authenticated, the chief being
the famous _Quarterly_ review of Tennyson’s early work. Eking this
further with indications from letters and the like, we shall find in
Lockhart a notable though a more accomplished instance of the class of
critic to which, on the other side, Jeffrey also belonged. He is
differentiated from Jeffrey by a harder, if clearer and stronger,
intellect, by more critical system, and, no doubt, by less amiability of
temper. He had formed his taste by a deeper and wider education, he
possessed a better style, and he had, as his non-critical work shows,
far more imagination.

[Sidenote: _The_ Tennyson _review_.]

In the “Tennyson” paper, the authorship of which appears to be certain,
we have an example of Lockhart himself and of the school of criticism
which he represents, very far from at the best, but far also from at the
worst. This worst would have been nearly reached by him, if we could
believe the earlier “Keats” article in _Blackwood_ to be his—a charge
which, fortunately, is as yet Not Proven to any competent court, though
there may be searchings of heart about it. Undoubtedly Lockhart was
capable of indulging in that style of sneering insolence which, though
it is intellectually at a higher level by far than the other style of
hectoring abuse, is nearly as offensive, and less excusable because it
requires and denotes this very intellectual superiority. But the author
of the Tennyson article displays neither. He is merely polite and even
good-tempered for the most part; and it is constantly necessary to
remember, that if there were beauties which ought to have drawn his eyes
away from the faults, there were, in the earlier versions of these early
poems, faults enough to draw the eyes of any critic of his stamp away
from the beauties. There were trivial and mawkish things which have
disappeared entirely; flawed things which have been reforged into
perfect ring and temper; things, in the main precious, which were marred
by easily removable disfigurements. From unwillingness to accept the
later stages of a movement of which he had joyfully shared the earlier,
Lockhart cannot be cleared; but his guilt extends little further.

[Sidenote: _On Coleridge, Burns, Scott, and Hook._]

And he has excellent compurgation to bring forward against it. Quite
early, in _Peter’s Letters_, he had defended the genius of Coleridge
against his detractors with admirable vigour and taste. He is
extraordinarily good on Burns. The abundant critical remarks which he
has interspersed in the _Life of Scott_ itself, afford a wonderful
exhibition of sensitiveness and fineness of taste, with nothing to be
set on the other side except the very pardonable tendency to undervalue
and grudge a little in the case of the non-Scottish novels. But an
almost better instance of Lockhart’s critical power, on the biographical
as well as the literary side, is to be found in his article on Theodore
Hook, with its remarkable welcome of the new school of Victorian
novelists, which shows that his want of receptivity, as regards new
poetry, did not extend to prose fiction.

[Sidenote: _His general critical character._]

On the whole, we have few better examples than Lockhart, if we have any,
of the severer type of critic—of the newer school, but with a certain
tendency towards the older—a little too prone, when his sympathies were
not specially enlisted, to think that his subjects would be “nane the
waur of a hanging”—a little too quick to ban, and too slow to bless—but
acute, scholarly, logical, wide enough in range, when his special
prejudices did not interfere, and entitled to some extent to throw the
responsibility of those prejudices on the political and literary
circumstances of his time.

[Sidenote: _Hartley Coleridge._]

If the pixies had not doomed Hartley Coleridge[917] to a career (or an
absence of one) so strange and in a manner so sad, there would pretty
certainly have been a case, not merely of poetic son succeeding poetic
father, against the alleged impossibility or at least non-occurrence of
which succession he himself mildly protested, but of critical faculty
likewise descending in almost the highest intensity from father to son.
And the not ungracious creatures might plead that, after all,
opportunity was not lacking. During that strange latter half of his
lifetime when he fulfilled, more literally than happily, the poetic
prophecy of Wordsworth in his childhood, he seems to have had very
little other occupation—indoors at least—besides criticism actual and
practical. But, with the inveterate Coleridgean habit of “marginalling,”
and the equally inveterate one of never turning the Marginalia to any
solid account, the results of this practice, save in the case of the
famous copy of Anderson’s _Poets_ (shabbiest and slovenliest
treasure-house of treasures immortal and priceless!) which bears his
father’s and uncle’s notes as well as his own, are mostly Sibylline
Leaves _after_ the passage of the blast. [Sidenote: _Forlorn condition
of his criticism._] When a man commits his critical thoughts to the
narrow margins of weekly newspapers _unbound_—indeed, if he had them
bound, the binder would no doubt have exterminated them after the
fashion of his ruthless race—he might just as well write on water, and
better on sand. Still, the _disjecta membra_ do exist—in the _Biographia
Borealis_, or _Northern Worthies_, to some extent; in the Essays,
collected by the pious, if sometimes a little patronising, care of his
brother Derwent, to a much greater; and perhaps in one instance only,
the “Massinger and Ford” Introduction, after a fashion in a manner
finished. Yet even here the intended critical _coda_ is wanting, and the
inevitable critical divagation too much present.

[Sidenote: _Its quality._]

But in all this there is also present, after a fashion of which I can
remember no other instance, the evidences of a critical genius which not
only did not give itself, but which absolutely refused itself, a chance.
Hartley Coleridge has never, I think, been the subject of much study:
but a more tempting matter for “problem” lovers can hardly exist.
Nothing in his _known_ history accounts for the refusal. He was
admittedly not temperate: but no one has ever pretended that he was the
slave of drink to the extent to which his father was the slave of opium;
his interest in literature was intense and undying—that every page that
he ever wrote shows beyond possibility of doubt; and the fineness of his
critical perceptions is equally indubitable. [Sidenote: _Defects_] But
the extraordinary and, I think, unparalleled intellectual indolence—or
rather intellectual paralysis—which beset him, seems to have prevented
him not merely from writing, but from that mere reading in which men,
too indolent to make any great use of it, constantly indulge as a mere
pleasure and pastime. He confesses frankly that he had read very little
indeed: and this, though he had been almost all his life within reach
of, and for great part of it actually under the same roof with,
Southey’s hardly equalled library. This ignorance leads him wrong not
only on matters of fact, but also on matters of opinion: indeed, he
seldom goes wrong, except when he does not know enough about the matter.

It is unfortunate that we have hardly anything finished from him in the
critical way, except the “Massinger and Ford” and the Essays he wrote
for _Blackwood_, while these last bear such a strong impress of Wilson’s
own manner[918] that it is impossible not to think them
Christopherically sophisticated. In the _Northern Worthies_ he professes
not to meddle with Criticism at all, or to touch it very little. In the
“Marvell,” however, the “Bentley,” the “Ascham,” the “Mason,” the
“Roscoe,” and the “Congreve,” he is better than his word, and gives some
excellent criticism as a seasoning to the biography. [Sidenote: _and
examples._] One cannot, indeed, but grudge the time that he spends on
such worthless stuff as _Elfrida_ and _Caractacus_, but we must remember
that in that generation of transition, the generation of Milman and
Talfourd earlier, of Henry Taylor and others later, the possibility of
reviving the serious drama was a very important subject indeed. Hartley,
whose reverence for his father is as pleasant as his affection for his
mother, evidently thought much of _Remorse_ and _Zapolya_, and might
probably, if he ever could have got his will to face any hedge, have
tried such things himself. On Congreve he is nearly at his best: and his
essay certainly ought to be included in that unique volume of _variorum_
critical documents on the Restoration Drama, which somebody some day may
have the sense to edit.

But he would be neither Hartley nor Coleridge if he were not best in the
_Marginalia_, good as the “Massinger and Ford” introduction is in parts.
The “Anderson” notes, and those on Shakespeare, deserve the most careful
reading: and I shall be much surprised if any competent reader fails to
see that the man who wrote them at least had it in him to have made no
inadequate thirdsman to his father[919] and Hazlitt.

[Sidenote: _Maginn._]

Very few people nowadays, in all probability, think much of “bright,
broken Maginn”[920] as a critic; and of those few some perhaps
associate his criticism chiefly with such examples of it as the
article on Grantley Berkeley, which almost excused the retaliation on
its unfortunate publisher, or the vain attempt to “bluff” out the
Keats matter by ridiculing _Adonais_. Even as to most of his
exercitations in this most unlovely department, or rather corruption,
of our art, there is perhaps something to be said for him. He fights,
as a rule, not with Lockhart’s dagger of ice-brook temper, nor with
Wilson’s smashing bludgeon, but with a kind of horse-whip, stinging
indeed enough, but letting out no life and breaking no bones at worst
and heaviest, at lightest not much more than switching playfully. Had
there, however, been nothing to plead for him but this, there would
have been no room for him here. [Sidenote: _His parody-criticisms_]
But his favourite way of proceeding in his lighter critical articles,
though not invented by himself (as it was not of course invented even
by Canning and his merry men, from whom Maginn took it), the method of
parody-criticism, is, if not a very high variety, and especially not
in the least a convincing one, still one which perhaps deserves a few
lines of reference, and of which he was himself decidedly the chief
master. These parody-criticisms[921] are often quite good-natured, and
they exhibit the seamy sides of the various styles in a manner which
is critical “after a sort.”

[Sidenote: _and more serious efforts._]

Still, a mere allusion would suffice for them if they stood alone, and
Maginn’s paragraph might be completed by observing that he has repaired
the absolutely false statement, that “Michael Angelo was a very
indifferent poet,” by the far too true one, that “Any modern sermon,
after the Litany of the Church of England, is an extreme example of the
bathos.”[922] But his _Essay on Dr Farmer’s Learning of
Shakespeare_,[923] and the much shorter but still substantial _Lady
Macbeth_,[924] are by no means to be omitted or merely catalogued. These
two pieces show that Maginn, if

only he could have kept his hand from the glass, and his pen from mere
gambols or worse, not only might but would have been one of the most
considerable of English critics. The goodness, and the various
goodness, of both is all the more remarkable because Maginn seems to
have owed little or nothing to the influence of Coleridge. Almost the
only fault in the first is the hectoring incivility with which Farmer
himself is spoken of, and this, as we have seen, is but too old a
fault with critics, while it was specially prevalent at this period,
and our own is far from guiltless of it. But the sense and learning of
the paper are simply admirable: and Maginn’s possession of the last
critical secret is almost shown by his wise restraint in arguing that
Farmer’s argument for Shakespeare’s ignorance is invalid, without
going on, as some would do, and have done, to argue the poet
omniscient by learning as well as by genius. As for the _Lady
Macbeth_, the sense is reinforced, and the learning (here not
necessary) replaced, by taste and subtlety of the most uncommon kind.
I do not know a piece of dramatic character-criticism (no, not the
thousand-times-praised thing in _Wilhelm Meister_) more unerringly
delicate and right. And this man, not, as the cackle goes, by “neglect
of genius,” by the wicked refusal of patrons to patronise, not by
anything of the kind, but by sheer lack of self-command, wasted his
time in vulgar journalism at the worst, and with rare exceptions[925]
in mere sport-making at the best!

We have been occupied since the beginning of this chapter by men who,
save in the case of Hartley Coleridge, were closely connected with the
periodical press, and owed almost all their communication with the
public to it. We now come to a pair, greater than any of them, who were
indeed “contributors,” but not contributors mainly.

[Sidenote: _Macaulay._]

Another great name is added, by Macaulay, to the long and pleasant list
of our examples how “Phibbus car” has, in unexpected and puzzling but
always interesting ways, “made or marred the” not always “foolish Fates”
of critics and criticism. When we first meet him as a critic of scarcely
four-and-twenty, in the articles contributed to _Knight’s Quarterly_, we
may feel inclined to say that nobody whom we have yet met (except
perhaps Southey) can have had at that age a wider range of reading, and
nobody at all an apparently keener relish for it. [Sidenote: _His
exceptional competence in some ways._] He is, what Southey was not, a
competent scholar in the classics; he knows later (if unfortunately not
quite earlier) English literature extraordinarily well; he has, what was
once common with us, but was in his days getting rare, and has since
grown rarer, a pretty thorough knowledge of Italian, and he is certainly
not ignorant of French (though perhaps at no time did he thoroughly
relish its literature), while he is later to add Spanish and German. But
he does not only know, he loves. There is already much personal rhetoric
and mannerism especially in the peroration of his review of Mitford’s
_Greece_, where he reproaches that Tory historian with his neglect of
Greek literature. But it is quite evidently sincere. He has shown
similar enthusiasm, combined in a manner not banal, in his earlier
article on Dante, and he shows wonderful and prophetic knowledge of at
least parts of literature in his paper on the Athenian Orators, as well
as in the later article on History belonging to his more recognised
literary period. [Sidenote: _The early articles._] From a candidate of
this kind, but just qualified to be a deacon of the Church in years, we
may surely expect a deacon in the craft of criticism before very long,
particularly when he happens to possess a ready-made style of
extraordinarily, and not merely, popular qualities. There are some who
would say that this expectation was fully realised: I am afraid I cannot
quite agree with them, and it is my business here to show why.

[Sidenote: _His drawbacks._]

We have said that, even in these early exercitations, Macaulay’s
characteristics appear strongly: and among not the least strongly
appearing are some from which, unless a man disengages himself, he shall
very hardly become a really great literary critic. The first of these is
the well-known and not seriously to be denied tendency, not merely to
“cocksureness,” but to a sweeping indulgence in superlatives, a
“knock-me-down-these-knaves” gesticulation, which is the very negation
of the critical attitude. Even the sound, the genuine, the well-deserved
literary preferences above referred to lose not a little by this tone of
swaggering sententiousness in their expression; and they lose a great
deal more by the simultaneous appearance of the hopelessly uncritical
habit of making the whites more dazzling by splashing the deepest black
alongside of them. The very eulogy of Dante as a whole seems to Macaulay
incomplete without an elaborate pendant of depreciation of Petrarch,
while “Tasso, Marino, Guarini, and Metastasio” are swept into a dust-bin
of common disdain, and we are told that the _Secchia Rapita_, “the best
poem of its kind in some respects,” is “painfully diffuse and languid,”
qualities which one might have thought destructive of any “bestness.”

[Sidenote: _The practical choking of the good seed._]

It is of less importance—because the fault is so common as to be almost
universal—that the “Mitford” displays very strong political prejudice,
which certainly affects, as it should not do, the literary judgment.
Mitford may have been an irregular and capricious writer, but the worst
vices of the worst Rymer-and-Dennis criticism appear in the description
of him as “bad.” His style could not possibly be so described by a fair
critic who did not set out with the major premiss that whatever is
unusual is bad. And not only here, but even in the purely literary
essays, even at their most enthusiastically literary pitch, we may, I
think, without any unfairness, perceive an undertone, an undercurrent,
of preference for the not purely literary sides of the matter—for
literature as it bears on history, politics, manners, man, instead of
for literature in itself and for itself.

With the transference from _Knight’s_ to the _Edinburgh_, which was
political and partisan-political, or nothing, these seeds of evil grew
and nourished, and to some extent choked the others. The “Milton,” the
“Machiavelli,” the early and, for a long time, uncollected “Dryden,”
serve as very hot-beds for them. All three are, as the French would say,
_jonchés_ with superlatives, arranged side by side in contrast like that
of a zebra. The “Dryden”—a very tempting subject for this kind of work—
is not the worst critically; indeed it is perhaps the best. It is, at
any rate, far the most really literary, and it may not be unfair to
think that this had something to do with the fact that Macaulay did not
include it in the collected _Essays_.

[Sidenote: _His literary surveys in the_ Letters.]

The real _locus classicus_, however, for Macaulay’s criticism is perhaps
to be found, not in his published works at all, but in the letters which
he wrote to Flower Ellis from Calcutta,[926] taken in connection with
their context in Sir George Trevelyan’s book, and especially with the
remarkable avowal which occurs in a letter, a very little later, to
Macvey Napier. Macaulay, as is well known, availed himself of his Indian
sojourn to indulge in almost a debauch of reading, especially in pure
literature, and especially (again) in the classics. And his reflections
to Ellis, a kindred spirit, are of the most interesting kind. He tells
his correspondent that he has gone back to Greek literature with a
passion quite astonishing to himself. He had been enraptured with
Italian, little less pleased with Spanish, but when he went back to
Greek he felt as if he had never known before what intellectual
enjoyment was. It is impossible to imagine a happier critical
_diathesis_: and the individual symptoms confirm it. Admiration of
Æschylus is practically a passport for a man claiming poetical taste:
admiration of Thucydides holds the same place in prose. And Macaulay
puts them both _super æthera_. But it is a tell-tale that his admiration
for Thucydides (of whom he says he had formerly not thought much) seems
to have been determined by his own recent attention to “historical
researches and political affairs.” He does full justice to Lucian. He is
capital on Niebuhr: a good deal less capital on the Greek Romances; for
though Achilles Tatius is not impeccable in taste and exceeding peccable
in morality, it is absurd to call his book “detestable trash.” Perhaps
he is hard on Statius as compared with Lucan: but here taste is free. It
is more difficult to excuse him for the remark that St Augustine in his
_Confessions_ (a book not without interest) “expresses himself in the
style of a field-preacher.” The present writer is not fond of
conventicles, either house or hedge. But if he knew of a field-preacher
who preached as St Augustine writes, he fears he might be tempted
astray.

[Sidenote: _His confession._]

And then, after the six months’ voyage home in the slow _Lord
Hungerford_ (which must have been six months' hard reading, though not
penal), comes the great avowal to Macvey Napier, now editor of the
_Edinburgh_:—

  You cannot suspect me of any affectation of modesty: and you will
  therefore believe me that I tell you what I sincerely think, when I
  say that I am not successful in analysing the effect of works of
  genius. I have written several things on historical, political, and
  moral questions of which, on the fullest reconsideration, I am not
  ashamed, and by which I should be willing to be estimated; but _I have
  never written a page of criticism on poetry or the fine arts which I
  would not burn if I had the power_. Hazlitt used to say of himself, “I
  am nothing if not critical.” The case with me is exactly the reverse;
  I have a strong and acute enjoyment of works of the imagination, but I
  have never habituated myself to dissect them.... Trust to my knowledge
  of myself; I never in my life was more certain of anything than of
  what I tell you, and I am sure that Lord Jeffrey will tell you exactly
  the same.[927]

Such a deliberate judgment on himself by such a man, close on the “age
of wisdom,”[928] after fifteen years’ constant literary practice, is
practically final; but probably not a few readers of Sir George’s book
felt, as the present writer did, that it merely confirms an opinion
formed by themselves long before they ever read it.

[Sidenote: _The_ Essays.]

At any rate, in nearly all the best known _Essays_ the literary interest
dwindles and the social-historic grows. I do not object, as some do, to
the famous “Robert Montgomery.” This sort of criticism ought not to be
done too often: and no one but a Dennis of the other kind enjoys doing
it, except when the criminal’s desert is of peculiar richness. But it
has to be done sometimes, and it is here done scientifically, without
rudeness I think, with as much justice[929] as need be “for the good of
the people,” and well. Still, it is not in the hangman’s drudgery, it is
in the herald’s good office, that Macaulay’s critical weakness shows.
There are some who, in all good faith and honest indignation, will
doubtless cry “What! is there no literary interest in the “Milton”
itself or in the “Bunyan”? Certainly there is. But, in the first case,
let the Devil’s Advocate’s devil (it is too easy for his chief) remind
us that there is very strong party feeling in both—that no less a person
than Mr Matthew Arnold denied criticism to the “Milton”—that the author
of the “Bunyan” himself puts in the forefront of his praise of _The
Pilgrim’s Progress_ its “strong _human_ interest,” and that he goes on
to make one of his too frequent uncritical contrasts, and one of his
very rare gross blunders of fact, as to the _Faerie Queene_. And,
besides, he was still in the green tree, as he was also when he gave
the, in part, excellent criticism of the “Byron,” where the sweeping
general lines of the sketch of the poetry of “correctness” follow those
of some inferior but more original surveys of Macaulay’s editor Jeffrey.
And though there is interesting criticism in the “Boswell,” it is pushed
to the wall by the (I fear it must be said) ignoble desire to “dust the
varlet’s jacket,” and pay Croker off in the _Edinburgh_ for blows
received at St Stephen’s.[930]

Indeed it would be quite idle to stipulate that anything here said to
the detriment of Macaulay’s criticism is said relatively, if there were
not a sort of doubtless honest folk who seem to think that denying a man
the riches of Crœsus means that he is penniless and in debt. Macaulay
_was_ a critic on his day—a good one for a long time, and perhaps always
a great one _in potentia_. But his criticism was slowly edged out by its
rivals or choked by its own parasitic plants. It occupies about a
twentieth part (to adopt his own favourite arithmetical method) of the
Essay on Bacon, about one-tenth of that on Temple. In the famous piece
on “Restoration Drama” it is the moral and social, not the literary or
even the dramatic, side of the matter that interests Macaulay: and in
dealing with Addison himself, a man who, though not quite literary or
nothing, was certainly literary first of all, the purely literary
handling is entirely subordinated to other parts of the treatment. This
may be a good thing or it may be a bad thing: the _tendenz_-critics, and
the criticism-of-life critics, and the others, are quite welcome to take
the first view if they please. But that it is a _thing_; that Macaulay
himself acknowledged it, and that—despite his unsurpassed devotion to
literature and his great performance therein—it must affect our estimate
of him, according to the schedules and specifications of this book, is
not, I think, deniable by any honest inquirer.

[Sidenote: _Similar dwindling in Carlyle._]

A phenomenon by no means wholly dissimilar in kind, but conditioned as
to extent and degree by the differing temperaments and circumstances of
the two men, may be seen in the criticism of Macaulay’s great
contemporary, opposite, and corrective, Carlyle;[931] and those who care
for such investigations might find it interesting to compare both with
the admitted instances of dwindling literary interest—not critical but
simply enjoying—in cases like that of Darwin. But leaving this extension
as out of our province, and returning to our two great men of letters
themselves, we shall find differences enough between them, here as
elsewhere, but a remarkable agreement in the gradual ascendancy obtained
by anthropology over (in the old and good sense, not the modern
perversion) philology. Carlyle had always the more catholic, as Macaulay
had the exacter, sense of literary form; but it may be suspected that at
no time was the form chiefly eloquent to either: and in Carlyle’s
attitude for many years after the somewhat tardy commencement of his
actual critical career, something ominous may be observed. It may seem
strange and impious to some of those who acknowledge no greater debt for
mental stimulation to any one than to Carlyle, and who rank him among
the greatest in all literature, to find one who joins them in this
homage, and perhaps outgoes most of them therein, questioning his
position as a critic. Let us therefore examine the matter somewhat
carefully.

Carlyle’s criticism, like his other qualities, interpenetrates nearly
all his work, from _Sartor_ to the “Kings of Norway”: it appears in the
_Life of Schiller_,[932] in _Heroes and Hero-Worship_, in _Past and
Present_, in the _Life of Sterling_, while it _fuliginates_ itself to
share in the general fuliginousness of the _Latter-day Pamphlets_, and
is strewn even over the greater biographies and histories of the
_Cromwell_ and the _Frederick_. We shall, however, lose nothing, and
gain much, by confining ourselves mainly to the literary constituents of
the great collection of _Essays_ in this place. The discussion can be
warranted to be well leavened with remembrance of the other work.

Who indeed is more rememberable than Carlyle? Of late years, partly from
having read them so much, partly from having so much else to read, I
have left parts of these Essays unopened for a long time. Yet, in
looking them through for the purpose of this present writing, I have
found myself constantly, even in the least familiar and famous parts,
able to shut the book and complete clause, sentence, or even to some
extent paragraph, like a text, or a collect, or a tag of Horace or
Virgil. But in this re-reading it has struck me, even more forcibly than
of old, how much Carlyle’s strictly critical inclinations, if not his
strictly critical faculties, waned as he grew older. In the earlier
Essays—those written before and during the momentous period of the
Craigenputtock sojourn—there is a great deal of purely or almost purely
literary criticism of an excellent kind—sober and vigorous, fresh and
well disciplined. There may be, especially in regard to Richter and
Goethe, a slightly exaggerated backing of the German side. But it is
hardly more than slightly exaggerated, and the treatment generally is of
the most thorough kind compatible with an avowed tendency towards
“philosophical” rather than “formal” criticism. Professor Vaughan was
certainly justified in including part of the _Goethe_ in his selected
specimens of English criticism[933] for its general principles and
examples of method. Nor is Carlyle less to be praised for his discharge
of the more definitely practical part of the critic’s business. He is
thought of generally as “splenetic and rash”: but it would be impossible
to find anywhere a more good-humoured, and (in parts at least) a more
judicial censure than that of William Taylor’s preposterous _German
Poetry_,[934] or a firmer, completer, and at the same time less
excessive condemnation than that of the equally preposterous method of
Croker’s original _Boswell_. We may see already that the critic
evidently prefers matter to form, and that he is by no means quite
catholic even in his fancy for matter. [Sidenote: _The earlier_ Essays.]
But he has a right to be this; and altogether there are few things in
English criticism better worth reading, marking, and learning, by the
novice, than the literary parts of these earlier volumes of
_Essays_.[935] It may be that the channels in which his ink first flowed
(especially that rather carefully, not to say primly, banked and paved
one of the _Edinburgh_) imposed some restriction on him; it may be that
he found the yet unpublished, or just published, _Sartor_ a sufficient
“lasher” to draw off the superfluous flood and foam of his fancy. But
the facts are the facts.

[Sidenote: _The later._]

And so, too, it is the fact that, later, he draws away from the attitude
of purely literary consideration, if he does not, as he sometimes still
later does, take up one actually hostile to this. The interesting
“Characteristics” (as early as 1831) is one of the places most to be
recommended to people who want to know what Carlyle really was, and not
what divers more or less wise or unwise commentators have said of him.
The writer has flings at literary art—especially conscious literary art—
towards the beginning: afterwards (which is still more significant) he
hardly takes any notice of it at all. In the much better known
“Boswell,” “Burns,” and “Scott”[936] Essays, his neglect of the purely
literary side is again the more remarkable, because it is not
ostentatious. In the “Diderot,” dealing with a subject who was as much a
man of letters first of all (though of very various and _applied_
letters) as perhaps any man in history, he cannot and does not neglect
that subject’s literary performance; but the paper is evidence of the
very strongest how little of his real interest is bestowed upon it. It
is of the man Diderot—and of the man Diderot’s relation to, and
illumination of, that condition of the French mind and state of which
some good folk have thought that Carlyle knew nothing—that he is
thinking, for this that he is caring. Later still, he will select for
his favourite subjects people like Mirabeau, who had much better have
written no books at all, or Dr Francia, whose connection with literature
is chiefly limited to the fact of his having written one immortal
sentence. And this sentence, not having myself seen or wished to see the
works of Rengger, I have always suspected that Carlyle or “Sauerteig”
edited for him.[937]

[Sidenote: _The attitude of the_ Latter-day Pamphlets.]

And then things get worse. That invocation of the Devil in the
_Latter-day Pamphlets_,[938] “to fly away with the poor Fine Arts,” is
indeed put off on “one of our most distinguished public men.” But
Carlyle avows sympathy with it. He even progresses from it to the
Platonic view that “Fiction” at all “is not quite a permissible thing”—
is “sparingly permissible” at any rate. “Homer” was meant for
“history”:[939] the arts were not “sent into the world to fib and
dance.” As for Literature more particularly, “if it continue to be the
haven of expatriated spiritualisms,” well: but “if it dwindle, as _is
probable_, into mere merry-andrewism, windy twaddle, and feats of
spiritual legerdemain,” there “will be no hope for it.” Its “regiment”
is “extremely miscellaneous,” “more a _canaille_ than a regiment,” and
so forth. The “brave young British man” is adjured to be “rather shy of
Literature than otherwise, for the present,”—a counsel which, it is well
known, Mr Carlyle repeated in his Edinburgh Rectorial address sixteen
years later. Nor did he ever alter the point of view which he had now
taken up, either in book, or minor published work, or Letters, or
autobiographic jottings, or those _Ana_ which still flit on the mouths
of men concerning his later years.

[Sidenote: _The conclusion of this matter._]

A man who speaks thus, and thinks thus, has perforce renounced the
development of any skill that he may once have had in the analysis of
the strands of the tight-rope, or the component drugs of the Cup of
Abominations. Still less can he be expected to expatiate, with the true
critic’s delight, on the elegance with which the dancer pirouettes over
vacancy, or on the iridescent richness of the wine of Circe, as it
moveth itself in the chalice. I do not know that—great critic, really,
as he had been earlier and always might have been—the loss of his
services in this function is much to be regretted. For he did other
things which assuredly most merely literary critics could not have done:
and not a few good workmen stepped forward, in the last thirty years of
his life, to do the work which he thus left undone, not without some
flouting and scorning of it. But, once more, the fact is the fact: and
his estrangement from the task, like that of Macaulay, undoubtedly had
something to do with the general critical poverty of the period of
English literature, which was the most fertile and vigorous in the
literary life of both.

[Sidenote: _Thackeray._]

Another of the very greatest gods of mid-nineteenth century literature
in England displays the slightly anti-critical turn of his time still
more curiously. It is one of the oddest and most interesting of the many
differences between the two great masters of English prose fiction in
the mid-nineteenth century that, while there is hardly any critical view
of literature in Dickens, Thackeray is full of such views.[940] He
himself practised criticism early and late; and despite the
characteristic and perhaps very slightly affected depreciation of the
business of “reading books and giving judgment on them,” which appears
in _Pendennis_ and other places, it is quite clear that he pursued that
business for love as well as for money. Moreover, from first to last,—
from his early and long uncollected “High-Jinkish” exploits in _Fraser_
to the _Roundabout Papers_,—he produced critical work from which an
anthology of the very finest critical quality, and by no means small in
bulk, might be extracted with little pains and no little pleasure.
[Sidenote: _His one critical weakness_] If he “attains not unto the
first three,” it is I think only from the effect of the reaction or ebb
that we note in this chapter, and from a certain deficiency in that
catholic sureness which a critic of the highest kind can hardly lack.
Nobody is obliged to like everything good; probably no one _can_ like
everything good. But, in case of disliking, the critic must be able
either to give reasons (like those of Longinus in regard to the
_Odyssey_) relatively, if not positively, satisfactory: or he must
frankly admit that his objections are based upon something
extra-literary, and that therefore, in strictness, he has no literary
judgment to give.

Now Thackeray does not do this. He was not, perhaps, very good at giving
reasons at all: and he was specially affected by that confusion of
literary and extra-literary considerations from which all times suffer,
but from which his own time and party—the moderate Liberals of the
mid-nineteenth century in England—suffered more than any time or party
known to us. Practically we have his confession, in the famous and
dramatically paradoxical sentence on Swift, that, though he is the
greatest of the Humourist company, “I say we should hoot him.” The
literary critic who has “got salvation” knows that he must never do
this—that whatever his dislike for the man—Milton, Racine, Swift, Pope,
Rousseau, Byron, Wordsworth (I purposely mix up dislikes which are with
those which are not mine)—he must not allow them to colour his judgment
of the writer. _Gulliver_ may be a terrible, humiliating, heart-crushing
indictment, but nothing can prevent it from being a glorious _book_: and
so on. Now Thackeray, by virtue of that quality of his, different sides
of which have been—with equal lack of wisdom perhaps—labelled “cynicism”
and “sentimentality,” was wont to be very “peccant in this kind,” and
it, with some, though less, purely political or religious prejudice, and
a little caprice, undoubtedly flawed his criticism.

[Sidenote: _and excellence._]

When, however, these outside disturbers kept quiet, as they very often
did, Thackeray’s criticism is astonishingly catholic and sound, and
sometimes he was able to turn the disturbers themselves out. He had a
most unhappy and Philistine dislike of the High Church movement: yet the
passage in _Pendennis_ on _The Christian Year_ is one of the sacred
places of sympathetic notice. The well-known _locus_ in _The Newcomes_,
as to the Colonel’s horror at the new literary gods, shows how sound
Thackeray’s own faith in them was: yet he, least of all men, could be
accused of forsaking the old. He had that generous appreciation of his
own fellow-craftsmen by which novelists have been honourably
distinguished from poets: though not all poets have been jealous, and
though, from Richardson downwards, there have been very jealous
novelists. If there were more criticism like the famous passage on Dumas
in the _Roundabouts_, like great part of the solid _English Humourists_,
like much elsewhere, our poor Goddess would not be liable to have her
comeliness confounded with the ugliness of her personators, as is so
often the case. And his is no promiscuous and undiscriminating
generosity. He can “like nicely,” and does.

Still, though he has sometimes escaped the disadvantages of his
temperament, he has often succumbed to those of his time; and what those
disadvantages were cannot be better shown than by an instance to which
we may now turn.

[Sidenote: Blackwood, _in 1849, on Tennyson_.]

When, in writing a little book upon Mr Matthew Arnold,[941] the present
writer spoke severely of the state of English criticism between 1830 and
1860, some protests were made, as though the stricture were an instance
of that “unfairness to the last generation” which has been frequently
noticed, and invariably deprecated and condemned here. I gave, on that
occasion, some illustrative instances;[942] I may here add another and
very remarkable one, which I had not at that time studied. In April 1849
there appeared in _Blackwood’s Magazine_ an article of some length on
Tennyson’s work, which at the time consisted of the revised and
consolidated _Poems_ of 1842 (still further castigated in the one-volume
form, so familiar to the youth of my generation), and of _The Princess_.
This article[943] is not in the least uncivil—“Maga” had now outgrown
her hoydenish ways: but we do not find the maturer, yet hardly less
attractive, graces of the _trentaine_. The writer proclaims himself
blind and deaf at every moment. He misses—he positively blasphemes—the
beauty of many things that Wilson had frankly welcomed. He selects for
praise such second—or third-rate matter as _The Talking Oak_.
_Claribel_, not Tennyson’s greatest thing, but the very Tennyson in
germ, “leaves as little impression on the living ear as it would on the
sleeper beneath.” The exquisite _Ode to Memory_, with all its dreamy
loveliness, is “an utter failure throughout,” it is a “mist” “coloured
by no ray of beauty.” But the critic is made most unhappy by the song “A
spirit haunts the last year’s bowers.” It is “an odious piece of
pedantry.” Its admirable harmony, at once as delightful and as true to
true English prosody as verse can be, extracts from him the remark,
“What metre, Greek or Roman, Russian or Chinese, it was intended to
imitate, we have no care to inquire: the man was writing English, and
had no justifiable pretence for torturing our ears with verse like
this.” The _Lady of Shalott_ is “intolerable,” “odious,” “irritating,”
“an annoyance,” “a caprice”: anybody who likes it “must be far gone in
dilettanteism.” Refrains are “melancholy iterations.” With a rather
pleasing frankness the critic half confesses that he knows he ought to
like the _Marianas_, but wholly declares that he does not. He likes the
_Lotos-Eaters_, so that he cannot have been congenitally deprived of
_all_ the seven senses of Poetry; but he cannot even form an idea what
“the horse with wings kept down by its heavy rider” means in the _Vision
of Sin_, and he cannot away with the _Palace_ and the _Dream_, now
purged, let it be remembered, of their “balloons” and Groves-of-Blarney
stanzas, and in their perfect beauty. “Giving himself away,” in the
fatal fashion of such censors, he does not merely in effect pronounce
them both with rare exceptions “bad and unreadable,” but selects the
magnificent line—

                   “Throb through the ribbed stone”—

for special ridicule. “To hear one’s own voice throbbing through the
ribbed stone is a startling novelty in acoustics,” which simply shows,
not merely that he had never heard his own or any other voice singing
under a vaulted roof, but that he had not the mite of imagination
necessary for conceiving the effect. With _The Princess_, as less _pure_
poetry—good as it is—he is less unhappy; but he is not at all
comfortable there.

To do our critic justice, however, though it makes his case a still more
leading one, he is not one of the too common carpers who string a
reasonless “I don’t like this” to a tell-tale “I can’t understand that,”
until they can twist a ball (not of cowslips) to fling at a poet. He
has, or thinks he has, a theory: and in some respects his theory is not
a bad one. He admits that “the subtle play of imagination” may be “the
most poetical part of a poem,” that it may “constitute the difference
between poetry and prose,” which is good enough. But he thinks you may
have too much of this good thing, that it may be “too much divorced from
those sources of interest which affect all mankind”; and he thinks,
further, that this divorce has taken place, not merely in Tennyson, but
in Keats and in Shelley. Yet, again, as has been indeed already made
evident, he has not in the least learnt the secret of that prosodic
freedom, slowly broadened down from precedent to precedent of early
Middle English writers, and Chaucer, and the Balladists, and Spenser,
and Shakespeare, and Milton, and Coleridge, which it is the glory of the
nineteenth century to have perfected. And he detests the new poetic
diction, aiming at the utmost reach of visual as well as musical appeal,
which came with this freedom. His recoil from the “jingling rhythm”
throws him with a shudder against the “resplendent gibberish.” In other
words, he is not at focus: he is outside. He can neither see nor hear:
and therefore he cannot judge.

But others’ eyes and ears were opening, though slowly, and with
indistinct results, at first.

[Sidenote: _George Brimley._]

I hardly know a book more interesting to the real student of real
criticism than George Brimley’s _Essays_.[944] That it gives us, with
Matthew Arnold’s earliest work, the first courses of the new temple of
English Criticism is something, but its intrinsic attraction is its
chief. The writer was apparently able to devote his short but not
unhappy life, without let or hindrance other than that of feeble health,
to literature; he was unhampered by any distracting desire to create; he
could judge and enjoy with that almost uncanny calmness which often
results, in happy dispositions, from the beneficent effect of the _mal
physique_, freed from the aggravation of the _mal moral_.[945] He has
idols; but he breaks away from them, if he does not quite break them. He
puts no others in their places, as Arnold did too often: and, like
Dryden (though they had no other point of resemblance than in both being
admirable critics, and both members of Trinity College, Cambridge), he
never goes wrong without coming right, with a force and vehemence of
leap only intensified by his recoil. In his best work, what should be
the famous, and is, to those who know it, the delightful, Essay on
Tennyson, we have a thing profitable at once for example, for reproof,
and for instruction, as few critical things are.

[Sidenote: _His Essay on Tennyson._]

We find him at the opening a little joined to one idol, that apparently
respectable, but infinitely false, god, the belief that the poet must
somehow or other deal with modern life.[946] Even from this point of
view he will not give up Tennyson, but he apologises for him, and he
colours nearly all his remarks on at least the early _Poems_ by the
apologies. He cannot shake himself quite free. He sees the beauty of
_Claribel_: but he will not allow its beauty to be its sole duty. It “is
not quite certain what the precise feeling of it is,” and “no poem ought
to admit of such a doubt.” No music of verse, no pictorial power, “will
enable a reader to care for such ‘creatures of the fancy’” as Margaret
or Eleanore, as the Sea Fairies, and many others. “_If_ expression were
the highest aim of poetry,” _Mariana_ would be consummate: but—--! Mr
Tennyson “moved in the centre of the most distinguished young men of the
University,” “yet his poems present faint evidences of this,” strange to
say! _The Miller’s Daughter_, and _The Gardener’s Daughter_, and _The
May Queen_ are dwelt on at great length, and with an evident feeling
that here is something you can recommend to a practical friend who
cannot embrace day-dreams. _Mariana in the South_ should “connect itself
more clearly with a person brought before the mind”—with a certificate
of birth, let us say, and something about her parentage, and the bad man
who left her, and the price of beans and garlic in the next village.
_The Lady of Shalott_ “eliminates all human interest.” _Fatima_, justly
admired, “has neither beginning, middle, or end.” _The Palace of Art_
has “no adequate _dramatic_ presentation of the mode in which the great
law of humanity works out its processes in the soul.” [So lyric poets,
we understand, are _not_ entitled to speak lyrically: but must write
drama!] And, greatest shock of all, _The Dream of Fair Women_ is not so
much as mentioned. When Brimley wrote it had long shaken off its earlier
crudities,—had attained its final symmetry. It was there, entire and
perfect, from the exquisite opening, through the matchless blended
shiftings of life and literature, woven into one passionate whole, to
those last two stanzas which give the motto of Life itself from youth to
age, the _raison d'être_ of Heaven, the undying sting of Hell, the
secret of the peace that grows on the soul through Purgatory. And the
critic says nothing about it!

Yet he has justified his instinct—if not quite his cleared vision—from
the first. Of _Claribel_ itself, of the _Marianas_, of _The
Lotos-Eaters_, of the _Palace_, he has given analytic appreciations so
enthusiastic, and at the same time so just, so solidly thought, and so
delicately phrased, that there is nothing like them in Mr Arnold (who
was rather grudging of such things), and nothing superior to them
anywhere.

There is a priceless wavering, a soul-saving “suppose it were true?” in
that “If” (most virtuous of its kind!),—“_If_ expression were the
highest aim of poetry,” nor do I think it fanciful to see in the
blasphemy about music and painting _not_ saving “creatures of the
fancy,” a vain protest against the conviction that they _do_. Where he
can get his prejudice and his judgment to run in couples—as in regard to
_Locksley Hall_—the car sweeps triumphantly from start to finish, out of
all danger from the turning pillar. When he comes to _Maud_ (which the
folk who had the prejudice, but not the judgment, were blaspheming at
the very moment at which he wrote), he turns on them with a vehemence
almost inconsistent—but with the blessed inconsistency which is
permissible—and lays it down plump and plain, that “it is well not to be
frightened out of the enjoyment of fine poetry ... by such epithets as
morbid, hysterical, spasmodic.” Most true, and it would be still better
to add “beginning,” “middle,” “end,” “not human,” the neglect of
acquaintance with the most distinguished young men of the university,
the absence of dramatic presentation, and the rest of them, to the herd
of bogies that should first be left to animate swine, and then be driven
into the deep. Once, indeed, afterwards he half relapses, observing that
there is “incongruity” in _The Princess_. But his nerves have grown
firmer from his long bath of pure poetry, and he agrees to make the best
of it.

[Sidenote: _His other work._]

This “Tennyson” essay is one of a hundred pages, though not very large
ones: but the only other piece of length which has been preserved, a
paper on “Wordsworth” not much shorter than the “Tennyson,” is, as was
perhaps natural, seeing that it was published immediately after the
poet’s death, mainly biographical, and so uninteresting: while the
remaining contents of the volume are short reviews. The “Wordsworth”
starts, however, with reasoned estimates of Byron, Scott, and Shelley,
as foils to Wordsworth: and to these, remembering their time,[947] the
very middle of the century, we turn with interest. The “Byron” and the
“Scott” reward us but moderately: they are in the main “what he ought to
have said,”—competent, well-balanced, true enough as far as they go, but
showing no very individual grip. The Shelley, a better test, is far more
satisfactory in the result. It is quite clear that Brimley sympathised
neither with Shelley’s religious views, nor with his politics, nor with
his morals. He may be thought to be even positively unjust in saying
that Shelley’s “mind was ill-trained, and not well furnished with
facts,” for _intellectually_ few poets have been better off in this
respect. Yet, in spite of all this, he says, “with one exception a more
glorious poet has not been given to the English nation,” which once more
shows how very much sounder he was on the subject of poetry than Arnold,
and how little beginnings, and middles, and ends, with all their
trumpery, really mattered to him. Among the shorter pieces, the attempts
at abstract, or partly abstract, treatment in “Poetry and Criticism” and
“The Angel in the House” (only part of which latter is actually devoted
to its amiable but rather wool-gathering title-subject) are not
conspicuously successful; they are, in fact, trial-essays, by a
comparative novice, in an art the secrets of which had been almost lost
for nearly a generation. But the attempt in “Poetry and Criticism” to
gather up, squeeze out, and give form to the Coleridgean vaguenesses
(for that is very much what it comes to), has promise and germ. As for
the smaller reviews, Mr Brimley had the good fortune to deal as a
reviewer with Carlyle, Thackeray, and Dickens, as well as Bulwer and
Kingsley, not to mention such different subjects as the _Noctes
Ambrosianæ_ and the _Philosophie Positive_: and the merit of coming out,
with hardly a stain upon his character, from any one of these (in some
cases very high) trials. We may think that he does not always go fully
right; but he never goes utterly wrong. And when we think what sorrowful
chances have awaited the collision of great books at their first
appearance even with by no means little critics, the praise is not
small.

[Sidenote: _His intrinsic and chronological importance._]

Yet a sufficient study of the “Tennyson” essay should have quite
prepared the expert reader for these minor successes. Brimley, as we
have said, was only partially favoured by time, place, and circumstance,
even putting health out of the question. He was heavily handicapped in
that respect: and he had no time to work out his critical deliverance
fully, and to justify it by abundant critical performance. But he has
the root of the matter in him: and it throws out the flower of the
matter in that refusal to be “frightened out of the enjoyment of fine
poetry by epithets.” When a man has once shown himself _ausus contemnere
vana_ in this way, when he has the initial taste which Brimley
everywhere shows, and the institution of learning which he did not lack,
it will go hard but he is a good critic _in posse_ already, and harder
if he is not a good one in such actuality as is allowed him. And this
was well seen of George Brimley.

[Sidenote: “_Gyas and Cloanthus._”]

It is one of the penalties, late but heavy, of an attempt to take a
kingdom (even one not of Heaven) by storm for the first time, that you
have to “refuse” or “mask” not a few of its apparently strong places—and
if their strength be more than apparent, the adventurer will not be
conqueror. There are in English, as in other nineteenth-century
literatures, many persons who addressed themselves more or less
seriously to criticism, who obtained more or less name as critics, with
whose works every well-read person is more or less acquainted, yet who
must be so refused or masked at the writer’s peril of the reader’s
disappointment or disapproval. Many of them seemed to be pillars of the
early and middle nineteenth-century reviews; from some of them, no
doubt, some institution in criticism has been received by readers of all
the three generations which have passed since the appearance of the
earliest. [Sidenote: _Milman, Croker, Hayward._] It may seem intolerable
_outrecuidance_ to put Milman and Croker and Hayward, Sydney Smith and
Senior and Helps, with others not even named, as it were “in the
fourpenny box” of our stall. Yet it is unavoidable, and the stall-keeper
must dare it, not merely—not even mainly—because he has no room to give
them better display. Milman was at least thought by Byron a formidable
enough critic to have the apocryphal crime of “killing John Keats”
assigned to him by hypothesis: and his merits (not of the bravo kind)
are no doubt much greater than the bad critics who, after Macaulay,
depreciate his style, and the maladroit eulogists of his free thought,
who would make him a sort of nineteenth-century Conyers Middleton,
appear to think. But he has no critical credential, known to the present
writer, that would give him substantive place here.[948] Croker was
neither such a bad man nor such a bad writer as Macaulay would have had
him to be: but he was almost as much more of a bravo than Milman as he
was less of a scholar. Senior, before he became a glorified earwig, or,
if this seem disrespectful, the father of all such as interview, was a
sound, if not very gifted, reviewer, but little more: Hayward, a much
cleverer and, above all, much more worldly wise Isaac Disraeli, who made
the most of being “in society” (see Thackeray), talked better than he
wrote, but still wrote well, especially by the aid of _l’esprit des
autres_. [Sidenote: _Sydney Smith, Senior, Helps._] Of Sydney Smith
earlier, and Sir Arthur Helps later, the fairest thing to say in our
present context is, that neither held himself out as a literary critic
at all. Sydney could give admirable accounts of books: but he nowhere
shows, or pretends to, the slightest sense of literature. Helps,
starting[949] a discussion on Fiction,—the very most interesting and
most promising of all literary subjects for a man of his time—a subject
which was just equipped with material enough at hand, and not yet too
much, neither novel to the point of danger nor stale to the point of
desperation,—“keeps to the obvious,” as one of his own characters
acknowledges, in a fashion almost excusing the intrinsically silly
reaction from obviousness, which distinguished the last quarter of the
century, and is now getting obviously stale itself. The influence of
works of fiction is unbounded. The Duke of Marlborough took his history
from Shakespeare. Fiction is good as creating sympathy. It is bad as
leading us into dreamland. Real life is more real than fiction. Writers
of fiction have great responsibility. In shorter formula, “We love our
Novel with an N because it is Nice; we hate it because it is sometimes
Naughty; we take it to the Osteria[950] of the Obvious, and treat it
with an Olio of Obligingness and Objurgation.” But Helps, in this very
passage, tells us that he prefers life to literature, and no one can be
a good critic who, _when he criticises_, does that: though he may be a
very bad one, and yet make the other preference.

[Sidenote: _Elwin, Lancaster, Hannay._]

We must still extend this _numerus_ a little in order to do that
justice—unjust at the best—which is possible here, and which is yet not
quite so futile and inadequate as some still more unjust judgments would
have it. For the object of this History is to revive and keep before the
eye of the reader the names, the critical position, and, if only by
touches, the critical personality, of as many of those who have done
good service to criticism in the past as may be possible. A little less
wilfulness and exclusiveness of personal taste, or rather less
opportunity of indulging it, would probably have made of Whitwell Elwin—
who survived till the earlier portion of this book was published, but
did his critical work long ago—a really great critic. Even as it is, his
_Remains_[951] contain some of the best critical essays, not absolutely
supreme, to be found among the enormous stores of the nineteenth
century, especially on the most _English_ Englishmen of letters during
the eighteenth, such as Fielding and Johnson. A short life, avocations
of business, and perhaps the absence of the pressure of professional
literary occupation, prevented the work of Henry Lancaster[952] from
being much more than a specimen: but his famous essay on Thackeray
showed (and not alone) what he could do. On the other hand, the not
always mischievous, though too often galling, yoke of the profession was
not wanting to James Hannay. His literary work was directed into too
many paths, some of them too much strewn with the thorns and beset with
the briars of journalism. But there are very few books of the kind which
unite a certain “popularity” in no invidious sense, and an adaptation
for the general reader, with sound and keen criticism, as does his far
too little known _Course of English Literature_;[953] while many of his
scattered and all but lost essays show admirable insight.

[Sidenote: _Dallas._]

To one remarkable critic, however, who, though a younger man than Mr
Arnold, is on the whole of a Præ-Arnoldian type, and to whom justice, I
think, has not usually been done, a little larger space must be given. I
must admit that, having been disgusted at the time of the appearance of
_The Gay Science_[954] by what I then thought its extremely silly, and
now think its by no means judicious, title, I never read it until quite
recently, and then found (of course) that Mr Dallas had said several of
my things before me, though usually with a difference.[955] But I have
not the least inclination to say _Pereat_: on the contrary, I should
like to revive him. [Sidenote: _The_ Poetics.] Fourteen years earlier
than the date of his principal book, as a young man fresh from the
influence of the Hamiltonian philosophy, and also, I think, imbued with
not a little of Ruskinism, he had written a volume of _Poetics_,[956]
which, though it does not come to very much, is a remarkable book, and a
very remarkable one, it we consider its date—a year before Mr Arnold’s
_Preface_, and when Brimley and others were only waking up by fits, and
starts, and relapses, to the necessity of a new criticism. Not that
Dallas is on the right track: but he is on a track very different from
that of most English critics since Coleridge. He revives, in an odd
way,—odd, at least, till we remember the Philistinism of the First
Exhibition period,—the Apologetic for Poetry; he establishes, rather in
the old scholastic manner, the distinction between Poetry the principle
and Poesy the embodiment: he talks about the “Law of Activity,” the “Law
of Harmony,” and the like.

[Sidenote: The Gay Science.]

There is, for the time, not a little promise in this: and there is much
more, as well as some, if not quite enough, performance, in the later
book. _The Gay Science_ (an adaptation, of course, of the Provençal name
for Poetry itself) was originally intended to be in four volumes: but
the reception of the two first was not such as to encourage the author—
who had by this time engaged in journalism, and become a regular writer
for _The Times_—to finish it. I cannot agree with the author of the
article in the _D. N. B._, that the cause of its ill-success was its
“abstruseness”: for really there is nothing difficult about it. On the
contrary, it is, I should say, rather too much in the style of the
leading article—facile, but a little “woolly.” Its faults seem to lie
partly in this, but more in the two facts that, in the first place, the
author “embraces more than he can grasp”; and that, in the second, he
has not kept pace with the revival of criticism, though he had in a
manner anticipated it. He knows a good deal; and he not only sees the
necessity of comparative criticism, but has a very shrewd notion of the
difference between the true and the false Comparisons. Acuteness in
perception and neatness in phrase appear pretty constantly: and he
certainly makes good preparation for steering himself right, by deciding
that Renaissance criticism is too verbal (he evidently did not know the
whole of it, but is right so far); German too idealist; Modern generally
too much lacking in system. Yet, when he comes to make his own start, he
“but yaws neither.” He is uncomfortable with Mr Arnold (who, by this
time, had published not merely the _Preface_ but the _Essays in
Criticism_), and finds fault with him, more often wrongly than rightly.
Especially he shows himself quite at a loss to comprehend Sainte-Beuve,
whom he, like some later persons, hardly thinks a critic at all.[957] He
gets boldly into the “_psycho_logical coach,” and books himself, as
resolutely as any German, for the City of Abstraction. “The theory of
imitation,” we are told, “is now utterly exploded”—a remarkable instance
of saying nearly the right thing in quite the wrong way. We travel
arm-in-arm with “Imagination” and “The Hidden Soul” (which seems to be
something like Unconscious Cerebration); we hear even more than from Mr
Arnold about the “Play of Thought”; we have chapters on chapters about
Pleasure—not the specially poetic pleasure, but pleasure in general. In
short, we are here in the presence, not so much of what we have called
“metacritic” as of something that might almost better be called
“_pro_critic”—altogether in the vestibule of critical inquiries proper.
Of course it is fair to remember the two unwritten or unpublished
volumes. But I venture very much to doubt, from a perusal of both his
published works, whether Dallas would have ever thoroughly “collected”
his method, or have directed it to that actual criticism of actual
literature, of which, however (as of most things), there are fragments
and essays in his work. The disturbing influences which, as we have
seen, acted on so many of his contemporaries or immediate seniors acted
differently on him, but they acted: and his literary “ideation” was, I
think, too diffuse to make head completely against them. Yet he had real
critical talent: and it is a pity that it has not had more adequate
recognition.

[Sidenote: _Others: J. S. Mill._]

But it is time to leave this part of the subject, only casting back
among the elders, because each of these has “become a name,”—to John
Foster,[958] and W.J. Fox,[959] Henry Rogers,[960] and the first Sir
James Stephen, not even naming others of perhaps hardly less fame. And
let us salute the man among these elders who, at first sight and
frankly, could pronounce _The Lady of Shalott_, “except that the
versification is less exquisite [it was much improved later], entitled
to a place by the side of _The Ancient Mariner_ and _Christabel_,” who
doubted whether “poetic imagery ever conveyed a more intense conception
of a place and its inmate than in _Mariana_,” and who justified his
right to pronounce on individual poems by the two very remarkable
articles on “What is Poetry?” and “The Two Kinds of Poetry.” One
remembers, with amused ruth, Charles Lamb’s friend and his “What a pity
that these fine ingenuous youths should grow up to be mere members of
Parliament?” as one thinks of the Juvenilia and the Senilia of John
Stuart Mill.[961]




                              CHAPTER III.

                      ENGLISH CRITICISM—1860-1900.

MATTHEW ARNOLD: ONE OF THE GREATER CRITICS—HIS POSITION DEFINED EARLY—
    THE ‘PREFACE’ OF 1853—ANALYSIS OF IT, AND INTERIM SUMMARY OF ITS
    GIST—CONTRAST WITH DRYDEN—CHAIR-WORK AT OXFORD, AND CONTRIBUTIONS TO
    PERIODICALS—‘ON TRANSLATING HOMER’—“THE GRAND STYLE”—DISCUSSION OF
    IT—THE STUDY OF CELTIC LITERATURE—ITS ASSUMPTIONS—THE ‘ESSAYS’:
    THEIR CASE FOR CRITICISM—THEIR EXAMPLES THEREOF—THE LATEST WORK—THE
    INTRODUCTION TO WARD’S ‘ENGLISH POETS’—“CRITICISM OF LIFE”—POETIC
    SUBJECT OR POETIC MOMENT—ARNOLD’S ACCOMPLISHMENT AND POSITION AS A
    CRITIC—THE CARLYLIANS—KINGSLEY—FROUDE—MR RUSKIN—G. H. LEWES—HIS
    ‘PRINCIPLES OF SUCCESS IN LITERATURE’—HIS ‘INNER LIFE OF ART’—
    BAGEHOT—R. H. HUTTON—HIS EVASIONS OF LITERARY CRITICISM—PATER—HIS
    FRANK HEDONISM—HIS “POLYTECHNY” AND HIS STYLE—HIS FORMULATION OF THE
    NEW CRITICAL ATTITUDE—‘THE RENAISSANCE’—OBJECTIONS TO ITS PROCESS—
    IMPORTANCE OF ‘MARIUS THE EPICUREAN’—‘APPRECIATIONS’ AND THE
    “GUARDIAN” ESSAYS—UNIVERSALITY OF HIS METHOD—MR J. A. SYMONDS—
    THOMSON (“B. V.”)—WILLIAM MINTO—HIS BOOKS ON ENGLISH PROSE AND
    POETRY—H. D. TRAILL—HIS CRITICAL STRENGTH—ON STERNE AND COLERIDGE—
    ESSAYS ON FICTION—“THE FUTURE OF HUMOUR”—OTHERS: MANSEL, VENABLES,
    STEPHEN, LORD HOUGHTON, PATTISON, CHURCH, ETC.—PATMORE—MR EDMUND
    GURNEY—‘THE POWER OF SOUND’—‘TERTIUM QUID.’


[Sidenote: _Matthew Arnold: one of the greater critics._]

In coming to Mr Matthew Arnold we come again, but for the last time, to
one of our chiefs of the greater clans of criticism. _Vixere fortes
post_ Mr Arnold; let us hope that _vivunt_. We have heard, more or less
vaguely, of new schools of criticism since, in more countries than one
or two, and an amiable enthusiasm has declared that the new gospels are
real gospels, far truer and better than any previously known. I am not
myself, by any means, in general agreement—I am often in very particular
disagreement—with Mr Arnold’s critical canons, and (less often) with his
individual judgments. But as I rest on my oars, and look back over
European criticism for the eighty years which have passed since his
birth, I cannot find one critic, born since that time, who can be ranked
above or even with him in general critical quality and accomplishment.
And, extending the view further over the vast expanse down which we have
already travelled, though I certainly find greater critics—critics very
much greater in originality, greater in catholicity, perhaps greater in
felicity of individual utterance—I yet find that he is of their race and
lineage, free of their company, one of them, not to be scanted of any
sizings that have been, by however unworthy a manciple, allotted to them
here.

[Sidenote: _His position defined early._]

We have seen that of these greater critics some have, at this or that
period of their career, launched a kind of manifesto or confession, of
which their other critical work is but, as it were, the application and
amplification: while others have never done this, but have built up
their critical temple, adding wing to wing and storey to storey, not
seldom even deserting or ruining the earlier constructions. Mr Arnold,
in practice as in principle, belonged to the first class, and he
launched his own manifesto about as early as any man can be capable of
forming a critical judgment which is not a mere adaptation of some one
else’s, or (a thing really quite as unoriginal) a flying-in-the-face of
some one else’s, or a mere spurt and splash of youthful
self-sufficiency. You can be a bishop and a critic at thirty—not before
(by wise external rule) in the former case; hardly before, according to
laws of nature which man has unwisely omitted to codify for himself, in
the latter. Mr Arnold was a little over thirty when, collecting such
things as he chose to collect out of his earlier volumes of Poetry, and
adding much to them, he published the collection with a Preface in
October 1853. I doubt whether he ever wrote better, either in sense or
in style; and I am quite sure that, while some of the defects of his
criticism, as it was to be, appear quite clearly in the paper, all the
pith and moment of that criticism appear in germ and principle likewise.

[Sidenote: _The_ Preface _of 1853_.]

In the interesting and important “Advertisement” which, eight months
later, he prefixed to the second edition of this book, Mr Arnold himself
summed up the lessons of the _Preface_, which followed it, under two
main heads,—the insistence on the importance of the subject—the “great
action”; and the further insistence on study of the ancients, with the
specified object of correcting the great vice of our modern, and
especially English, intellect—that it “is fantastic, and wants sanity.”
He thus, to some extent, justified the erection of these into his two
first and great commandments—the table-headings, if not the full
contents, of his creed and law. But, for our purpose, we must analyse
the Preface itself rather more closely.

It opens with an account of the reasons which led the author to exclude
_Empedocles_, not because the subject was “a Sicilian Greek,” but from a
consideration of the situation itself. This he condemns in a passage
which contains a very great amount of critical truth, which is quite
admirably expressed, and which really adds one to the not extensive list
of critical axioms of the first class. Even here one may venture to
doubt whether the supreme poet will not vindicate his omnipotence in
treating _poeticamente_. But if the sentence were so qualified as to
warn the poet that he will _hardly_ succeed, it would be absolutely
invulnerable or impregnable.

[Sidenote: _Analysis of it,_]

But why, he asks, does he dwell on this unimportant and private matter?
Because he wishes particularly to disclaim any deference to the
objection referred to above as to the choice of _ancient_ subjects: to
which he might have added (as the careful reader of the whole piece will
soon perceive), because insistence on the character of the Subject was
his critical being’s very end and aim. In effect, he uses both these
battle-horses in his assault upon the opposite doctrine that the poet
must “leave the exhausted past and fix his attention on the
present.”[962] It is needless to say that over his immediate antagonists
he is completely victorious. Whatever the origin of the ignoble and
inept fallacy concerned, this particular form of it was part of the
special mid-nineteenth century heresy of “progress.” But whether he
unhorses and “baffles” it in the right way may be another question.
_His_ way is to dwell once more, and with something already of the
famous Arnoldian iteration, on the paramount importance of the “action,”
on the vanity of the supposition that superior treatment will make up
for subjective inferiority. And he then exposes himself dangerously by
postulating the superior interest of “Achilles, Prometheus,
Clytemnestra, Dido,” to the personages of any modern poem, and, perhaps
still more dangerously, by selecting as his modern poems _Hermann and
Dorothea_, _Childe Harold_, _Jocelyn_ [!!!], and _The Excursion_. He may
be said here to lose a stirrup at least: but on the whole he certainly
establishes the point—too clear to need establishment—that the _date_ of
an action signifies nothing. While if the further statement that the
action itself is all-important is disputable, it is his doctrine and
hypothesis.

He is consistent with this doctrine when he goes on to argue that “the
Greeks understood it far more clearly than we do”—that “they regarded
the whole, we the parts”—that, while they kept the action uppermost, we
prefer the expression. Not that they neglected expression—“on the
contrary, they were ... the masters of the _grand style_.” Where they
did not indulge in this, where they were bald or trivial, it was merely
to let the majesty of the action stand forth without a veil. “Their
theory and practice alike, the admirable treatise of Aristotle and the
unrivalled works of their poets, exclaim with a thousand tongues, ‘All
depends upon the subject. Choose a fitting action, penetrate yourself
with the feeling of its situations; this done, everything else will
follow.’”[963]

As a necessary consequence, they were “rigidly exacting” as to
construction: _we_ believe in “the brilliant things that arise under the
poet’s pen as he goes along.” We refuse to ask for a “total impression”:
instead of requiring that the poet shall as far as possible efface
himself, we even lay it down that “a true allegory of the state of one’s
own mind in a representative history is perhaps the highest thing one
can attempt in the way of poetry.” Against this Mr Arnold pronounces
_Faust_—though the work of “the greatest poet of modern times, the
greatest critic of all times”[964]—defective, because it is something
like this. Next he deplores the want of a guide for a young writer, “a
voice to prescribe to him the aim he should keep in view”—and, in
default of it, insists once more on models.

The foremost of these models for the English writer is, of course,
Shakespeare, of whom Mr Arnold speaks with becoming reverence, and of
whom he had earned the right to speak by his magnificent sonnet years
earlier. But his attitude towards Shakespeare, as a literary Bible, is
guarded. Shakespeare chose subjects “than which the world could afford
no better”; but his expression was _too_ good—too “eminent and
unrivalled,” too fixing and seductive to the attention, so to draw it
away from those other things which were “his excellences _as a
poet_.”[965] In leading writers to forget this, Shakespeare has done
positive harm, and Keats’s _Pot of Basil_ is taken as an instance,
whence the critic diverges to a long condemnation of this great but
erring bard’s “difficulty” of language, and returns to the doctrine that
he is _not_ safe as a model. The ancients are: though even in them there
is something narrow, something local and temporary. But there is so much
that is not, and that is an antidote to modern banes, that we cannot too
much cling to them as models. These, he adds at some length, the present
age needs morally as much as artistically. He has himself tried, in the
poems he is issuing, to obey his own doctrines: and he ends with the
famous peroration imploring respect for Art, and pleading for the
observance and preservation of “the wholesome regulative laws of
Poetry,” lest they be “condemned and cancelled by the influence of their
eternal enemy, Caprice.”

[Sidenote: _and interim summary of its gist._]

Comment on this, beyond the remarks already made, had best be postponed
till we can consider Mr Arnold’s criticism as a whole. [Sidenote:
_Contrast with Dryden._]But to one thing we should draw attention, and
that is, that here is a critic who knows what he means, and who means
something not, directly, or as a whole, meant, or at least said, by any
earlier critic. That “all depends on the subject” had been said often
enough before: but it had not been said by any one who had the whole of
literature before him, and the tendency—for half a century distinctly,
for a full century more or less—had been to unsay or gainsay it.
Further, the critic has combined with the older Neo-classic adoration of
the “fable” something perhaps traceable, as hinted above, to the
Wordsworthian horror of poetic diction, a sort of cult of baldness
instead of beauty, and a distrust, if not horror, of “expression.” In
fact, though I do not believe that he in the least knew it, he is taking
up a position of direct and, as it were, designed antagonism to
Dryden’s, in that remarkable preface to _An Evening’s Love_, one of
those in which he comes closest to the Spaniards, where he says plumply
“the story is the least part,” and declares that the important part is
the workmanship—that _this_ is the _poiesis_. It is hardly possible to
state the “dependence”—in the old duelling sense—of the great quarrel of
Poetics, and almost of Criticism, more clearly than is done in these two
_Prefaces_ by these two great poet-critics of the seventeenth and the
nineteenth centuries in England.

I do not think that there is any published evidence of the time or of
the circumstances at and in which Mr Arnold began contributing critical
articles to periodicals. [Sidenote: _Chair-work at Oxford, and
contributions to periodicals._] But his appointment (which must have
been, at any rate to some extent, due to the _Preface_ as well as to the
_Poems_) to the Professorship of Poetry at Oxford in 1857 gave him a
strong stimulus towards the development of his critical powers in
reasoned form; while shortly afterwards, the remarkable developments of
the press towards the end of the ’Fifties, which began by the
institution of _Macmillan’s_ and the _Cornhill Magazine_, and continued
through the establishment of a strongly literary and critical daily
newspaper in the _Pall Mall Gazette_, to the multiplication of monthly
reviews proper in the _Fortnightly_, _Contemporary_, and _Nineteenth
Century_, supplied him with opportunities of communicating these studies
to a public larger than his Oxford audience, and with a profitable and
convenient intermediate stage between the lecture and the book. He was,
however, always rather scrupulous about permitting his utterances the
“third reading”: and some of them (notably his Inaugural Address at
Oxford) have still to be sought in the catacombs. But the matter of more
than a decade’s production, by which he chose to stand, is included in
the three well-known volumes, _On Translating Homer_ and _The Study of
Celtic Literature_ for the Oxford Lectures, and the famous _Essays in
Criticism_ for the more miscellaneous work, the last, however, being
rounded off and worked up into a whole by its Preface, and by its two
opening pieces, _The Function of Criticism in the Present Time_ and _The
Influence of Academies_.

In these three books the expression of critical attitude, displayed, as
we have said, unmistakably in the _Preface_ of 1853, is not only
developed and varied into something as nearly approaching to a _Summa
Criticismi_ as was in Mr Arnold’s not excessively systematic way, but
furnished and illustrated by an extraordinarily interesting and
sufficiently diversified body of critical applications in particular.
Yet there is no divergence from the lines marked out in the Preface, nor
is there to be found any such divergence—if divergence imply the least
contradiction or inconsistency—in the work of the last decade of his
life, when he had dropped his ill-omened guerilla against dogma and
miracles, and had returned to the Muses. He is as much a typical example
of a critic consistent in consistency as Dryden is of one consistent in
inconsistency: and it naturally requires less intelligence to comprehend
him than appears to be the case in the other instance. In fact, he could
never be misunderstood in general: though his extreme wilfulness, and
his contempt of history, sometimes made him a little bewildering to the
plain man in detail.

[Sidenote: On Translating Homer.]

In discussing the first, and indeed all, of these, it is, of course,
important to keep what is suitable for a History of Criticism apart from
what would be suitable only for a monograph on Mr Arnold. Yet the
idiosyncrasies of the greater critics are as much the subject of such a
general history as their more abstract doctrines. We see, then, here
something which was not difficult to discern, even in the more frugal
and guarded expression of the _Preface_, and which, no doubt, is to some
extent fostered and intensified by that freedom from the check of
immediate contradiction or criticism which some have unkindly called the
dangerous prerogative of preachers and professors. This something is the
Arnoldian confidence—that quality which Mr Hutton, perhaps rather
kindly, took for “sureness,” and which, though strangely different in
tone, is not so very different in actual nature from the other
“sureness” (with a prefix) of Lord Macaulay. We may think that this
confidence is certainly strengthened, and perhaps to some extent caused,
by a habit of turning the blind eye on subjects of which the critic does
not know very much, and inspecting very cursorily those which he does
not much like. But we shall see that, right or wrong, partial or
impartial, capricious or systematic as he may be, Mr Arnold applies
himself to the actual appreciation of actual literature, and to the
giving of reasons for his appreciation, in a way new, delightful,
invaluable.

[Sidenote: “_The grand style._”]

The really important part or feature of the tractate for us is its
famous handling of “the Grand Style.” He had used this phrase,
italicising it, in the _Preface_ itself, had declared that the ancients
were its “unapproached masters,” but he had not said much about it or
attempted to define it. Here he makes it almost his chief
battle-charger—presenting Homer, Dante, and Milton as the greatest
masters of it, if not the only sure ones, denying any _regular_
possession of it to Shakespeare, and going far to deny most other poets,
from Tennyson down to Young, the possession of it at all. It was
impossible that this enigmatic critical phrase, applied so
provocatively, should not itself draw the fire of critics. He could not
but reply to this in his “Last Words,” but he had to make something of a
confession and avoidance, with much sorrow, perhaps not without a very
little anger. For those who asked “What _is_ the Grand Style?”
mockingly, he had no answer: they were to “die in their sins.” To those
who asked with sincerity, he vouchsafed the answer that the grand style
“arises in poetry when a noble nature, poetically gifted, treats with
simplicity or severity a serious subject.” Let us, with as much
simplicity, severity, and seriousness as may be, treat both the
expression and the definition.

[Sidenote: _Discussion of it._]

The expression itself—the origin of which, like that of some others in
our special lexicon, is to be found in the criticism not of literature,
but of Art in the limited sense, and which was, I think, first made
current in English by Sir Joshua Reynolds—is of course a vague one, and
we must walk warily among its associations and suggestions. At one end
it suggests, with advantage to itself and to us honest inquirers, the
ὕψος of Longinus. At the other, it has perhaps a rather damaging
suggestion of the French _style noble_, and a still more dangerous
echo-hint of “grand_iose_.” And Mr Arnold himself once (_Preface_, ed.
1853, p. xix) uses “grandiose”, as we saw that the Latins and the French
have sometimes done, as equivalent to “grand”. Coming, then, unsatisfied
by these vaguenesses, to the definition, we shall perhaps think it
permissible to strike out the first two members, as in the former case
almost self-confessedly, in the second quite, superfluous. That the
Grand Style in poetry will only arise when the stylist is poetically
gifted scarcely requires even enunciation: that the nature which
produces the grand style must be _pro tanto_ and _pro hac vice_ “noble,”
is also sun-clear. Something of the Longinian circularity in one
point[966] seems to have infected Mr Arnold here. But with the rest of
the definition preliminary and _prima facie_ inquiry has no fault to
find. Let us take it that the Grand Style in poetry is the treatment of
a serious subject with simplicity or severity. Even to this a fresh
demurrer arises, which may be partly, but cannot be wholly, overruled.
Why this antithesis, this mutual exclusion, between “simplicity” and
“severity”? “Severe simplicity” is a common, and is generally thought a
just, phrase: at any rate, the two things are closely related. We may
note this only—adding in Mr Arnold’s favour that his special attribution
of simplicity to Homer and severity to Milton would seem to indicate
that by the latter word he means “gorgeousness _severely restrained_.”

This, with such additional and applied lights as are provided by Mr
Arnold’s denunciation of _affectation_ as fatal to the Grand Style, will
give us some idea of what he wished to mean by the phrase. It is, in
fact, a fresh formulation of the Classical restraint, definiteness,
proportion, form, against the Romantic vague, the Romantic fantasy. This
had been the lesson of the Preface, given after the preceptist manner.
It is now the applied, illustrated, appreciative lesson of the
_Lectures_. It is a doctrine like another: and, in its special form and
plan, an easily comprehensible reaction from a reaction—in fact, the
inevitable ebb after the equally inevitable flow. But when we begin to
examine it (especially in comparison with its Longinian original) as a
matter of theory, and with its own illustrations as a matter of
practice, doubts and difficulties come thick upon us, and we may even
feel under a sad necessity of “dying in our sins,” just as Mr Carlyle
thought that, at a certain period of his career, Ignatius Loyola “ought
to have made up his mind to be damned.”

To take the last first, it is difficult, on examining Mr Arnold’s
instances and his comments, in the most impartial and judicial manner
possible, to resist the conclusion that his definition only really fits
Dante, and that it was originally derived from the study of him. To that
fixed star of first magnitude in poetry it _does_ apply as true, as
nothing but true, and perhaps even as the whole truth. Nobility,
quintessential poetry, simplicity in at least some senses, severity and
seriousness in almost all,—who will deny these things to the _Commedia_?
But it is very difficult to think that it applies, in anything like the
same coequal and coextensive fashion, to either Homer or Milton. There
are points in which Homer touches Dante; there are points in which Dante
touches Milton; but they are not the same points. It may, further, be
very much doubted whether Mr Arnold has not greatly exaggerated both
Homer’s universal “simplicity” and his universal “seriousness.” The
ancients were certainly against him on the latter point. While one may
feel not so much doubt as certainty that the application of “severity”
to Milton—unless it means simply the absence of geniality and humour—is
still more rash.

But when we look back to Longinus we shall find at least a hint of a
much more serious defect than this. Why this unnecessary asceticism and
grudging in the connotation of grandeur? why this tell-tale and
self-accusing limitation further to a bare three poets, two of them,
indeed, of the very greatest? Mr Arnold himself feels the difficulty
presented by Shakespeare so strongly that he has to make, as it were,
uncovenanted grand-style mercies for him. But that is only because you
have simply to open almost any two pages out of three in Shakespeare,
and the grand style smites you in the face, as God’s glory smote St
Stephen. _We_ can afford, which shows our strength, to leave Shakespeare
alone. Longinus of old has no such damaging fencing of the table of
_his_ Grand Style. The Greeks, it is known, thought little of Love as a
subject: yet he admitted the sublimity of Sappho. And if he objected to
the πλεκτάνην χειμάρροον of Æschylus, it was only because he thought it
went too far. How much wiser is it, instead of fixing such arbitrary
limits, to recognise that the Grand Style has infinite manifestations;
that it may be found in poets who have it seldom as well as in those who
have it often; that Herrick has it with

                  “In this world—the Isle of Dreams”;

that Tennyson has it again and again; that Goethe has it in the final
octet of _Faust_; that Heine and Hugo, and hundreds of others, down to
quite minor poets in their one moment of rapturous union with the Muse,
have it. How much wiser to recognise further that it is not limited to
the simple or severe: whether it is to the serious is another question.
For my part, I will not loose the fragile boat or incur the danger of
the roof,—speaking in a Pickwickian-Horatian manner,—with any one who
denies the grand style to Donne or to Dryden, to Spenser or to Shelley.
The grand is the transcendent: and it is blasphemy against the Spirit of
Poetry to limit the fashions and the conditions of transcendence.

[Sidenote: _The Study of Celtic Literature._]

The other “chair”-book, _The Study of Celtic Literature_, is tempting in
promise, but disappointing in performance. This is due partly to the
fact that great—perhaps the greater—part of it is not occupied with
literary criticism at all, but with that curious blend of matter—
literary, political, theological, ethical, and social—to the manufacture
of which Mr Arnold was more and more turning his attention. And when it
becomes literary, we find other difficulties. In the _Preface_ itself,
and in the _Homer_, Mr Arnold had sometimes been unjust or
unsatisfactory on what he did not know or did not like—Mediæval
literature, the Ballad, &c.,—but his remarks and his theories had been,
in the main, solidly based upon what he did know thoroughly and did
appreciate—the Classics, Dante, Milton, Wordsworth. Here not Pallas, I
think, but some anti-Pallas, has “invented a new thing.” Whether Mr
Arnold knew directly, and at first-hand, _any_ Welsh, Breton, Cornish,
Irish, or Scotch Gaelic, I do not know.[967] He certainly disclaims
anything like extensive or accurate knowledge, and it is noticeable that
(I think invariably) he quotes from translations, and only a few
well-known translations. Moreover he, with his usual dislike and
distrust of the historic method, fences with, or puts off, the inquiry
what the dates of the _actual_ specimens which we possess of this
literature may be. Yet he proceeds to pick out (as if directly
acquainted with the literatures themselves, at dates which make the
matter certain) divers characteristics of “melancholy,” “natural magic,”
&c., in Celtic literature, and then, unhesitatingly and without proof of
any kind, to assign the presence of these qualities, in writers like
Shakespeare and Keats, where we have not the faintest evidence of Celtic
_blood_, to “Celtic” influence.

[Sidenote: _Its assumptions._]

Now, we may or may not deplore this proceeding; but we must disallow it.
It is both curious and instructive that the neglect of history which
accompanied the prevalence of Neo-classicism, and with which, when it
was dispelled, Neo-classicism itself faded, should reappear in company
with this _neotato_-classicism, this attempt to reconstruct the classic
faith, taking in something, but a carefully limited something, of
Romanticism. But the fact is certain: and, as has been said, we must
disallow the proceeding. Whether melancholy, and natural magic, and the
vague do strongly and especially, if not exclusively, appear in Celtic
poetry, I do not deny, because I do not know; that Mr Arnold’s evidence
is not sufficient to establish their special if not exclusive
prevalence, I deny, because I do know. That there is melancholy, natural
magic, the vague in Shakespeare and in Keats, I admit, because I know;
that Mr Arnold has any valid argument showing that their presence is due
to Celtic influence, I do not admit, because I know that he has produced
none. With bricks of ignorance and mortar of assumption you can build no
critical house.

[Sidenote: _The_ Essays: _their case for Criticism_.]

In that central citadel or canon of the subject, _Essays in Criticism_,
this contraband element, this theory divorced from history, makes its
appearance but too often: it can and need only be said, for instance,
that Mr Arnold’s estimate of the condition of French, and still more of
German, literature in his own day, as compared with English, will not
stand for five minutes the examination of any impartial judge, dates and
books in hand. But the divorce is by no means so prominent—indeed most
of the constituent essays were, if I mistake not, written before the
Celtic Lectures were delivered. The book is so much the best known of Mr
Arnold’s critical works—except perhaps the Preface to Mr Ward’s _Poets_—
that no elaborate analysis of it here can be necessary. Its own Preface
is defiantly vivacious—and Vivacity, as we are often reminded, is apt to
play her sober friend Criticism something like the tricks that Madge
Wildfire played to Jeanie Deans. But it contains, in the very last words
of its famous epiphonema to Oxford, an admission (in the phrase “this
Queen of Romance”) that Mr Arnold was anything but a classic _pur sang_.
The two first Essays, “The Function of Criticism at the Present Time”
and the “Influence of Academies,” take up, both in the vivacious and in
the sober manner, the main line and strategy of the old _Preface_
itself. We may, not merely with generosity but with justice, “write off”
the, as has been said, historically false parallels with France and
Germany which the writer brings in to support his case. That case itself
is perfectly solid and admissible. Those who are qualified to judge—not
perhaps a large number—will admit, whether they are for it or against
it, that no nonsuit is possible, and perhaps that no final decision for
it or against is possible either, except to the satisfaction of mere
individual taste and opinion.

The case is, that the remedy for the supposed or supposable deficiencies
of English literature is Criticism—that the business of Criticism is to
discover the ideas upon which creative literature must rest—that there
is not enough “play of mind” in England—that Criticism again is the
attempt “to know the best that is known and thought in the world”—that
foreign literature is specially valuable, simply because it is likely to
give that in which native literature is lacking. These are the doctrines
of the First Essay, mingled with much political-social application and
not a little banter. The second takes them up and applies them afresh in
the direction of extolling the institution of Academies, and contrasting
the effects of that influence on French critics and the absence of it in
English, very much to the disadvantage of the latter, especially Mr
Palgrave. For Mr Arnold had adopted early in his professorial career,
and never gave up, the very dubious habit of enforcing his doctrine with
“uses” of formally polite but extremely personal application.[968]

Now, this case or bundle of cases is, I have said, quite fairly and
justly arguable. Even though I hope that great part of this volume and
of the last will have shown that Mr Arnold was quite wrong as to the
general inferiority of English criticism, he was (as I have, not far
back, taken the pains to show also) not quite wrong about the general
criticism of his own youth and early manhood—of the criticism which he
himself came to reform. Nor was he wrong in thinking that there is in
the uncultivated and unregenerate English mind a sort of rebelliousness
to sound critical principles. Very much of his main contention is
perfectly good and sound: nor could he have urged any two things more
universally and everlastingly profitable than the charge never to
neglect criticism, and the charge always to compare literatures of other
countries, literatures of other times, literatures free from the
political-religious-social _diathesis_ of the actual patient.

[Sidenote: _Their examples thereof._]

It is generally acknowledged that the influence of Sainte-Beuve was an
“infortune of Mart” or of Saturn, when it induced Mr Arnold to take his
two first examples of this comparative study from interesting but
unimportant people like the Guérins. But except persons determined to
cavil, and those of whom the Judicious Poet remarks—

                 “For what was there each cared no jot,
                 But all were wroth with what was not”—

every one will admit that the rest of the seven—the “Heine,” the “Pagan
and Mediæval Religious Sentiment,” the “Joubert,” the “Spinoza,” and the
“M. Aurelius”—form a pentad of critical excellence, and brilliancy, and
instruction, which can nowhere be exceeded. I, at least, should find it
hard to match the group in any other single volume of criticism. Idle
that we may frequently smile or shake the head—that we must in some
cases politely but peremptorily deny individual propositions!
Unimportant that, perhaps even more by a certain natural perversity than
by the usual and most uncritical tendency to depress something in order
to exalt something else, English literature is, with special reference
to the great generation of 1798-1834, unduly depreciated! These things
every man can correct for himself. How many could make for themselves
instances of comparative, appreciative, loosely but subtly judicial
criticism as attractive, as stimulating, as graceful, as varied, and
critically as excellent, being at the same time real examples of
creative literature?

[Sidenote: _The latest work._]

We are fortunately dispensed here from inquiring into the causes, or
judging the results, of that avocation from literature, or at least
literary criticism, which held Mr Arnold for exactly ten years, from
1867 to 1877. Nor will it be necessary (though it would be pleasant) to
discuss in detail all the contributions of the slightly longer period
which was left him, from his return to his proper task in the spring of
1877 with the article on M. Scherer’s “Milton,” to his sudden and
lamented death in the spring of 1888. Just before that death he had
published an article on Shelley, which (for all the heresy glanced at
below) is one of the very best things he ever did; little less can be
said of the Milton-Scherer paper eleven years earlier, and whenever he
touched literature (which was fairly often) during the interval, he was
almost always at a very high level. A good deal, though not quite all,
of the ebullience of something not quite unlike flippancy, which had
characterised his middle period, had frothed and bubbled itself away;
his general critical views had matured without altering; and their
application to fresh subjects, if it sometimes (as very notably in the
case of Shelley) brought out their weakness, brought out much more fully
their value and charm. The article on Mr Stopford Brooke’s _Primer of
English Literature_, the prefaces to the selected Lives of Johnson, to
Wordsworth, to Byron, the papers in Mr Ward’s _Poets_ on Gray and Keats
(postponing for a moment the more important Introduction to that work as
a whole), the literary part of the _Discourses in America_, and (though
I should put this last quartette on a somewhat lower level) those on Mr
Scherer’s Goethe, George Sand, Tolstoi, and Amiel, form a critical
baggage, adding no doubt nothing (except in one case) to the critic’s
general Gospel or theory, but exemplifying with delightful variety and
charm his critical practice.

[Sidenote: _The Introduction to Ward’s_ English Poets.]

The possible or actual exception, however, and the piece which contains
it, require more individual notice. In the Introduction to Mr Ward’s
book, Mr Arnold devised no one really new thing, but he gathered up and
focussed his lights afresh, and endeavoured to provide his disciples
with an apparently new definition of poetry. He drove first at two wrong
estimates thereof, his dislike of the second of which—the “personal”
estimate—had been practically proclaimed from the very first, and may be
allowed to be to a great extent justified, while his dislike of the
first—the “historic” estimate—had always been clear to sharp-eyed
students, though it lacked an equal justification. In fact, it is little
more than a formulation of Mr Arnold’s own impatience with the task—
laborious enough, no doubt, and in parts ungrateful—of really mastering
poetic, that is to say literary, history. Of course, _mere_ age, _mere_
priority, confers no interest of itself on anything. But to say—if we
may avail ourselves of Gascoigne’s instance—that the first discoverable
person who compared a girl’s lip to a cherry does not acquire for that
now unpermissible comparison merit and interest, is not wise. To assume,
on the other hand, some abstract standard of “high” poetry, below which
time and relation will not give or enhance value, is still less wise.
Portia, in a context of which Mr Arnold was justly fond, might have
taught him that “nothing is good _without respect_,” and that _no_
“respect” is to be arbitrarily barred.

[Sidenote: “_Criticism of Life._”]

But even from the sweetest and wisest of doctors he would not, I fear,
have taken the lesson. He is set to prove that we must only pay
attention to “the best and principal things” as of old,—to class and
mark these jealously, and to endeavour to discover their qualification.
You must not praise the _Chanson de Roland_ or any early French poetry
very highly, but you may praise (as before) Homer, Milton, and Dante as
much as you like. Chaucer, like Burns, Dryden, and Pope, like Shelley,
has not “high seriousness.” And poetry is expressly defined as “a
criticism of life, under the conditions fixed for such a criticism by
the laws of poetic truth and poetic beauty.”

It is important (though very difficult) to keep undue repetition out of
such a book as this, and we shall therefore, in regard to “high
seriousness,” merely refer the reader to what has been said above on the
“grand style.” And we shall cut down criticism of the definition as much
as possible, to return to it presently. The defence of it once made, as
“not a definition but an epigram,” certainly lacks seriousness, whether
high or low. The severest strictures made on Mr Arnold’s levity would
not have been misplaced had he offered an epigram here. Nor need we
dwell on the perhaps inevitable, but certainly undeniable, “circularity”
of the formula. The _jugulum_ at which to aim is the use of the word
“criticism” _at all_. Either the word is employed in some private
jargon, or it has no business here. Mr Arnold’s own gloss of the
“application of ideas to life,” gives it perhaps the doubtful benefit of
the first supposition: but, either in this way or in others, does it
very little good. _All_ literature is the application of ideas to life:
and to say that poetry is the application of ideas to life, under the
conditions fixed for poetry, is simply a vain repetition.

[Sidenote: _Poetic Subject or Poetic Moment._]

Yet insufficient, and to some moods almost _saugrenu_, as such a
definition may seem at first sight, it is, calmly and critically
considered, only a re-forming of the old line of battle. Once more, and
for the last time formally, Mr Arnold is taking the field in favour of
the doctrine of the Poetic _Subject_, as against what we may, perhaps,
make a shift to call the “Doctrine of the Poetic _Moment_.” It is
somewhat surprising that, although this antinomy has been visible
throughout the whole long chain of documents which I have been
endeavouring to exhibit in order, no one, so far as I know, has ever
fully brought it out, at least on the one side. Mr Arnold—like all who
agree with him, and all with whom he and they agree, or would have
agreed, from Aristotle downwards—demands a subject of distinct and
considerable magnitude, a disposition of no small elaborateness, a
maintained and intense attitude, which is variously adumbrated by a
large number of terms, down to “grand style” and “high seriousness.” The
others, who have fought (we must confess most irregularly and confusedly
as a rule) under the flag which Patrizzi, himself half or wholly
unknowing, was the first to fly, go back, or forward, or aside to the
_Poetic Moment_—to the sudden transcendence and transfiguration—by
“treating poetically,” that is to say, by passionate interpretation, in
articulate music—of _any_ idea or image, _any_ sensation or sentiment.
They are perfectly ready to admit that he who has these moments most
constantly and regularly under his command—he who can co-ordinate and
arrange them most skilfully and most pleasingly—is the greatest poet,
and that, on the other hand, one or two moments of poetry will hardly
make a poet of any but infinitesimal and atomic greatness. But this is
the difference of the poets, not of the poetry. Shakespeare is an
infinitely great poet, and Langhorne an infinitesimally small one. Yet
when Langhorne writes

                “Where longs to fall that rifted spire
                  _As weary of the insulting air_,”[969]

he has in the italicised line a “poetic moment” which is, for its poetic
quality, as free of the poetic Jerusalem as “We are such stuff,” or the
dying words of Cleopatra. He has hit “what it was so easy to miss,” the
passionate expression, in articulate music, unhit before, never to be
poetically hit again save by accident, yet never to perish from the
world of poetry. It is only a grain of gold (“fish-scale” gold, even, as
the mining experts call their nearly impalpable specks), but it is gold:
something that you can never degrade to silver, or copper, or pinchbeck.

To Mr Arnold this doctrine of the Poetic Moment, though he never seems
to have quite realised it in its naked enormity (which, indeed, as I
have said, has seldom been frankly, as here, unveiled), was from the
first the Enemy. He attacked it, as we saw in his _Preface_, when he was
young, and he fashions this _Introduction_ so as to guard against it in
his age. Yet it is curious that in his practice he sometimes goes
perilously near to it. On his own showing, I cannot quite see, though I
can see it perfectly well on mine, why even such a magnificent line as

                  “In la sua volontade e nostra pace”

should not only prove Dante’s supremacy, but serve as an infallible
touchstone for detecting the presence or absence of high poetic quality
in other poetry. High poetic quality depends, we have been told, on the
selection and arrangement of the subject. Dante, we know accidentally
and from outside, _has_ that selection and arrangement. But suppose he
had not? The line itself can tell us nothing about them.

[Sidenote: _Arnold’s accomplishment and position as a critic._]

Nevertheless, as has been said so often, the side which a man may have
taken in the everlasting and irreconcilable critical battle of judges by
the arrangement, and judges by the result, hardly affects his place in
Criticism as it should be allotted by a final Court of Appeal. How does
he express for himself, and how does he promote in others, the
intelligent appreciation, the conscious enjoyment of literature? That is
the question: and few critics can meet this question more triumphantly
than Mr Arnold. Like others, he can but give what he has. If you ask him
for a clear, complete, resumed, and reasoned grasp of a man’s
accomplishment—for a definite placing of him in the literary atlas—he
will not have much answer to give you. He does not pretend, and has
never pretended, to give any. A certain want of logical and methodical
aptitude, which may be suspected, a dislike of reading matter that did
not interest him, which is pretty clear, and that dread and distrust of
the “historic estimate,” which he openly proclaimed, would have made
this impossible. But we were warned at the very outset not to go to him
for it. And for acute, sensitive, inspired, and inspiring _remarks_ on
the man, or the work, or this and that part of work and man—attractively
expressed, ingeniously co-ordinated, and redeemed from mere
desultoriness by the constant presence of the general critical creed—no
critic is his superior.

Nor are these his only “proofs”—his only “pieces in hand.” He may be
said—imperfectly Romantic, or even anti-Romantic, as he was—to have been
the very first critic to urge the importance, the necessity, of that
comparative criticism of different literatures, the half-blind working
of which had helped to create, if it had not actually created, the
Romantic movement. In England he was absolutely the first to do this
systematically, and with something like—though not with complete—
impartiality. The knowledge of Spanish and Italian poetry and romance,
long very common with us, had died down in the first half of the
nineteenth century, and had not been much used for critical purposes
while it lasted. The _engouement_ for French, of the late seventeenth
and eighteenth, had reacted itself—in men as different as Coleridge,
Landor, and De Quincey—into a depreciation which, if not “violently
absurd,” as Mr Arnold translates Rémusat’s term of _saugrenu_ applied to
it, was certainly either crassly ignorant or violently unjust. German
had, it is true, been exalted on the ruins of the popularity of the
three Romance literatures; but it had been worshipped scarcely according
to knowledge: and of the whole mediæval literature of Europe there was
hardly any general critical appreciation. Mr Arnold himself, in fact,
was still too much in the gall of bitterness here. It was imperative, if
the Romantic and “result-judging” criticism was not to become a mere
wilderness of ill-founded and partial individualisms, that this
comparison should be established. It was equally imperative that it
should be established, if Mr Arnold’s own “_neotato_-classicism,” as we
have called it, was not to wizen and ossify like Neo-classicism itself.
He was its first preacher with us: and there had not, to my knowledge,
been any such definite preacher of it abroad, though the practice of
Germany had implied and justified it from the first. And he was one of
its most accomplished practitioners,—Lessing not being equal to him in
charm, and Sainte-Beuve a little his inferior in passion for the best
things.

Yet another watch-word of his, sovereign for the time and new in most
countries, which he constantly repeated (if, being human, he did not
always fully observe it himself), was the caution against confounding
literary and non-literary judgment. No one rejected the exaggeration of
“Art for Art’s sake _only_” more unhesitatingly; but no one oftener
repeated the caution against letting the idols of the nation, the sect,
the party interfere with the free play of Art herself, and of critical
judgment on Art.

His services, therefore, to English Criticism, whether as a “preceptist”
or as an actual craftsman, cannot possibly be overestimated. In the
first respect he was, if not the absolute reformer,—these things, and
all things, reform themselves under the guidance of the Gods and the
Destinies, not of men,—the leader in reform, of the slovenly and
disorganised condition into which Romantic criticism had fallen. In the
second, the things which he had not, as well as those which he had,
combined to give him a place among the very first. He had not the
sublime and ever new-inspired inconsistency of Dryden. Dryden, in Mr
Arnold’s place, might have begun by cursing Shelley a little, but would
have ended by blessing him all but wholly. He had not the robustness of
Johnson; the supreme critical “reason” (as against understanding) of
Coleridge; scarcely the exquisite, if fitful, appreciation of Lamb, or
the full-blooded and passionate appreciation of Hazlitt. But he had an
exacter knowledge than Dryden’s; the fineness of his judgment shows
finer beside Johnson’s bluntness; he could not wool-gather like
Coleridge; his range was far wider than Lamb’s; his scholarship and his
delicacy alike give him an advantage over Hazlitt. Systematic without
being hidebound; well-read (if not exactly learned) without pedantry;
delicate and subtle, without weakness or dilettanteism; catholic without
eclecticism; enthusiastic without indiscriminateness,—Mr Arnold is one
of the best and most precious of teachers on his own side. And when, at
those moments which are, but should not be, rare, the Goddess of
Criticism descends, like Cambina and her lion-team, into the lists, and
with her Nepenthe makes men forget sides and sects in a common love of
literature, then he is one of the best and most precious of critics.

Mr Arnold’s criticism continued to be fresh and lively, without a touch
of senility, or of failure to adapt itself to new conditions, till the
day of his death: and when that evil day came, the nineteenth century
had little more than a decade to run. On the other hand, though almost
all his juniors were more or less affected by him, it cannot be exactly
said that he founded any definite school, or started any by reaction
from himself. The most remarkable approach to such a school that has
been made since was made by Mr Pater, quite fifteen years before Mr
Arnold died. No very special necessities of method, therefore, impose
themselves upon us in regard to the classification of our remaining
subjects in the English division: and we shall be safe in adopting a
rough chronological order, taking first three very remarkable persons
who—though contemporaries of Arnold—show in criticism as in other
literature the influence of Carlyle.

[Sidenote: _The Carlylians._]

The increasing disinclination to take the standpoint of pure literary
criticism which we noticed in the master, and which characterised the
second quarter of the century, naturally and inevitably reproduced
itself in the three most brilliant of his disciples—Ruskin, Froude, and
Kingsley—with interesting variants and developments according to the
idiosyncrasy of the individual. There was, indeed, in them something
which can hardly be said to have been in Carlyle at all—a weakness which
his internal fire burnt out of him. This weakness, formulated most
happily by an erratic person of genius whom I have alternately resolved
to admit and decided to exclude here—Thomas Love Peacock,—is the
principle that you “must take pleasure in the thing represented, before
you can derive any from the representation.”[970] Incidentally and
indirectly, no doubt, _omnes eodem cogimur_; or at least there are very
few who escape the suck of the whirlpool. But the declaration and formal
acceptance of the principle is comparatively modern: and it is one of
the worst inheritances of that Patristic attitude which we dwelt upon
long ago.[971] It is indeed closely connected with the doctrine that
“all depends upon the subject”: but the Greeks were too deeply
penetrated with æsthetic feeling to admit it openly, and, from the
earliest times, philosophised on the attraction of _repulsive_ subjects.
It is indirectly excluded, likewise, by the stricter kinds of
Neo-classic rule-criticism, which saw nothing to disapprove in such
poems as the _Syphilis_. But it has, like other dubious spirits, been
let loose by “the Anarchy.” That you may and should “like what you like”
is open to the twist of its correlative—that you may _dis_like what _you
choose to_ dislike.

[Sidenote: _Kingsley._]

At any rate, all these three distinguished persons showed the
Carlylian-Peacockian will-worship in their different ways, to an extent
which makes them, as critics, little more than extremely interesting
curiosities. Kingsley, the least strong, intellectually speaking, of the
three, shows it strongly enough. His saying (reported, I think, by the
late Mr Kegan Paul), when one of his children asked who and what was
Heine, “A bad man, my dear, a bad man,” is a specially interesting blend
of the doctrine formulated by Peacock with the old Platonic-Patristic
“the poet-is-a-_good man_” theory. Heine was not quite “a proper moral
man” in his early years, certainly: though one might have thought that
those later ones in the _Matraszen-Gruft_ would have atoned in the eyes
of the sternest inquisitor. But “bad” would have been a harsh term for
him at any time. Still, it emphasises the speaker’s inability to
distinguish between morality and genius, between the man and the work.
This inability was pretty universal with him, and it makes Kingsley’s
own work as criticism almost wholly untrustworthy, though often very
interesting and stimulating to readers who have the proper correctives
and antidotes ready: it even (which is not so very common a thing)
affects his praise nearly as much as his blame. You must be on your
guard against it, when he extols _Euphues_ and the _Fool of
Quality_[972] as much as when he depreciates Shelley.

[Sidenote: _Froude._]

There was less sentimental and ethical prejudice in Mr Froude than in
his brother-in-law, but his political and, in a wide, not to say loose,
sense philosophical, prejudices were even stronger, and he drew nearer
to Carlyle than did either Kingsley or Ruskin in a certain want of
_interest_ in literature as literature.[973]

[Sidenote: _Mr Ruskin._]

We reach, however, as every one will have anticipated, the furthest
point of our “eccentric” in Mr Ruskin. His waywardness is indeed a point
which needs no labouring, but it is never displayed more incalculably to
the unwary, more calculably to those who have the clue in their hands,
than in reference to his literary judgments. Injustice would be done to
Rapin and Rymer if we did not give some of the enormous paradoxes and
paralogisms to which he has committed himself in this way: but the very
abundance of them is daunting, and fortunately his work is not so far
from the hands of probable readers as the dustbin-catacombs where those
poor old dead lie. “Indignation is a poetical feeling if excited by
serious injury, but not if entertained on being cheated out of a small
sum of money.” You may admire the budding of a flower, but not a display
of fireworks. Contrast the famous exposure of the “pathetic fallacy”
with Scott’s supposed freedom from it, and you will find some of the
most exquisite _un_reasons in literature. The foam in Kingsley’s song
must not be “cruel,” but the Greta may be “happy,” simply because Ruskin
does not mind finding fault with Kingsley, but has sworn to find no
fault with Scott—perhaps also because he, very justly, likes sea-foam.
Squire Western is not “a character,” because Ruskin had determined that
only persons “without a _fimetic_ taint” can create character, and
Fielding had a fimetic taint. And dramatic poetry “despises external
circumstance” because Scott did _not_ despise external circumstance, and
explanation is wanted why he could not write a play. Whether, with the
most delicious absurdity, he works out a parallel between a “fictile”
Greek vase (which is also, one hears, “of the Madonna”) and “fiction,”
or is very nearly going to worship a locomotive when it makes a nasty
noise and convinces him of its diabolism, this same exquisite unreason
is always at the helm. It very often, generally indeed, is committed in
admiration of the right things; it is always delightful literature
itself. But it never has the judicial quality, and therefore it is never
Criticism.[974]

[Sidenote: _G. H. Lewes._]

That George Henry Lewes had many of the qualities of the critic it would
be mere foolish paradox to deny. His _Goethe_ and his _History_ (if not)
_of Philosophy_ yet “of Philosophers” are sufficient proofs for any one
to put in: and of his mastery of that element of criticism which goes to
the making of an _impresario_ the wonderful success with which he formed
and trained his companion, George Eliot, is a still more convincing
demonstration. [Sidenote: _His_ Principles of Success in Literature.] I
understand, also, that he had real merits as a dramatic critic. But his
chief critical work, _The Principles of Success in Literature_,[975]
betrays by its very title the presence of an element of _vulgarity_ in
him, which can indeed scarcely escape notice in other parts of his work,
and which is by no means removed or neutralised by the quasi-philosophic
tone of the work itself. Much may be forgiven to a man, born in the
first quarter of the nineteenth century, when he uses the words
“progress,” “success,” and the like: but not everything. Fame may be the
last infirmity of noble minds; Success is but the first and last morbid
appetite of the vulgar. And, as has been said, Lewes does not fully
redeem his title by his text. There is plenty of common-sense and
shrewdness. There is plenty of apparent and some real philosophy. Some,
no doubt, will delight to be told that there are three Laws of
Literature, that “the intellectual form is the Principle of Vision; the
moral form the Principle of Sincerity; and the æsthetic form the
Principle of Beauty,” and then to have these various eggs tossed and
caught, in deft arrangements, for some chapters.

Indeed, there be many truths in the book, and I would most carefully
guard against the idea that Lewes knowingly and deliberately recommends
a mere tradesman-like view of literature. On the contrary, he strongly
protests against it: and writes about Sincerity with every appearance of
being sincere.[976] But his view of Imagination is confessedly low, and
almost returns to the Addisonian standpoint of “ideas furnished by
sight.” And when, with a rather rash hiatus, he promises[977] “_for the
first time_ to expound scientifically the Laws that constitute the
Philosophy of Criticism,” we listen even less hopefully and even more
doubtfully than somebody did when he understood somebody else to say
that he had killed the Devil. Lewes is not unsound on the subject of
imitation of the classics. He has learnt from Coleridge, or from
Wordsworth, or from De Quincey, that style is the _body_ not the _dress_
of thought: and much that he says about it is extremely shrewd and true.
But when he comes to its actual Laws and gives them as Economy,
Simplicity, Sequence, Climax, and Variety, the old not at all divine
despair comes upon us. All these are well, but they are not Style’s
crown; they are only and hardly some of the balls and strawberry leaves
of that crown. A sentence, or a paragraph, or a page may be economic,
simple, sequacious, climacteric, and various, and not be good style. I
am not sure that a great piece of style might not be produced to which,
except by violence, no one of these epithets—I am sure that many such
pieces could be produced to which not all—will apply. Once more the
light and holy soul of literature has wings to fly at suspicion of these
bonds—and uses them.

[Sidenote: _His_ Inner Life of Art.]

Lewes’s best critical work by far[978] is to be found in the Essay on
_The Inner Life of Art_, where he handles, without ceremony and with
crushing force, the strange old and new prudery about the connection of
verse and poetry, declaring plumply that the one is the form of the
other. But it is noticeable that this Essay is in the main merely a
catena or chrestomathy of critical extracts, united by some useful
review-work. On the whole, even after dismissing or allowing for any
undue “nervous impression” created by the unlucky word “Success,” it is
not very possible to give him, as a critic, a position much higher than
one corresponding to the position of Helps. Lewes is a Helps much
unconventionalised and cosmopolitanised, not merely in externals. He is
not only much more skilled in philosophical terminology, but he really
knows more of what philosophy means. He has more, much more, care for
literature. But the stamp of the Exhibition of 1851 is upon him also:
and it is not for nothing that his favourite and most unreservedly
praised models of style are drawn from Macaulay. I have no contempt for
Macaulay’s style myself: I have ventured in more places than one or two
to stigmatise such contempt as entirely uncritical. But the _preference_
of this style tells us much in this context, as the _preference_ of
champagne in another.

[Sidenote: _Bagehot._]

The evils of dissipation of energy have been lamented by the grave and
precise in all ages: and some have held that they are specially
discoverable in the most modern times. It is very probable that
Criticism may charge to this account the comparatively faint and scanty
service done her by one who displayed so much faculty for that service
as Walter Bagehot. A man whose vocations and avocations extend (as he
himself says in a letter quoted by Mr Hutton) from hunting to banking,
and from arranging Christmas festivities to editing the _Economist_, can
have but odd moments for literature. Yet this man’s odd moments were far
from unprofitable. His essay on _Pure, Ornate, and Grotesque Art in
Poetry_ would deserve a place even in a not voluminous collection of the
best and most notable of its kind. The title, of course, indicates
Wordsworth, Tennyson, and Browning: and the paper itself may be said to
have been one of the earliest frankly to estate and recognise Tennyson—
the earliest of importance perhaps to estate and recognise Browning—
among the leaders of mid-nineteenth century poetry. As such titles are
wont to do, it somewhat overreaches itself, and certainly implies or
suggests a confusion as to the meaning of “pure.” If pure is to mean
“unadorned,” Wordsworth is most certainly not at his poetical best when
he has most of the quality, but generally at his worst; if it means
“sheer,” “intense,” “quintessential,” his best of poetry has certainly
no more of it than the best of either of the other two. The
classification suggests, and the text confirms, a certain “popularity”
in Bagehot’s criticism. But it is popular criticism of the very best
kind, and certainly not to be despised because it has something of
mid-nineteenth century, and Macaulayan, materialism and lack of
subtlety. This _derbheit_ sometimes led him wrong, as in that very
estimate of Gibbon which the same Mr Hutton praises, but oftener it
contributed sense and sanity to his criticism. And there are not many
better things in criticism than sanity and sense, especially when, as in
Bagehot’s case, they are combined with humour and with good-humour.[979]

[Sidenote: _R. H. Hutton._]

The criticism of a critic just cited, the late Mr R. H. Hutton, affords
opportunity for at least a glance at one of the most important general
points connected with our subject—the general distaste for pure
criticism, and the sort of relief which _l’homme sensuel moyen_ seems to
feel when the bitter cup is allayed and sweetened by sentimental, or
political, or religious, or philosophical, or anthropological, or
pantopragmatic adulteration. Mr Hutton’s criticism was, it is believed,
by far the most popular of his day; the very respectable newspaper which
he directed was once eulogised as “telling you what you _ought to_ read,
you know ”—a phrase which might have awakened in a new Wordsworth
thoughts too deep for tears or even for laughter.

[Sidenote: _His evasions of literary criticism._]

The commentary on it is supplied by the two volumes of Mr Hutton’s
selected and collected _Essays_.[980] These constantly deal with things
and persons of the highest importance in literature; but they abstain
with a sort of Pythagorean asceticism from the literary side of them. In
his repeated dealings with Carlyle, it is always as a man, as a teacher,
as a philosopher, as a politician, as a moralist, that he handles that
sage—never directly, or at most rapidly and incidentally, as a writer.
On Emerson he is a little more literary, but not much: and on him also
he slips away as usual. Even with Poe, whom one might have thought
literary or nothing, he contrives to elude us, till his judgment on the
Poems suggests that _inability_ to judge literature caused his refusal.
Dickens, Amiel, Mr Arnold himself—the most widely differing persons and
subjects—fail to tempt him into the literary open; and it is a curious
text for the sermon for which we have here no room that he most nearly
approaches the actual literary criticism of verse, not on Tennyson, not
on “Poetry and Pessimism,” not on Mr Shairp’s _Aspects of Poetry_, but
on Lord Houghton. He goes to the ant and is happy: with deans, and
bishops, and archbishops, and cardinals he is ready to play their own
game. But if Literature, as literature, makes any advances to him, he
leaves his garment in her hands and flees for his life.

[Sidenote: _Pater._]

To assert too positively that Mr Walter Pater was the most important
English critic of the last generation of the nineteenth century—that he
stands to that generation in a relation resembling those of Coleridge to
the first, and Arnold to the latter part of the second—would no doubt
cause grumbles. The Kingdom of Criticism has been of old compared to
that of Poland, and perhaps there is no closer point of resemblance than
the way in which critics, like Polacks, cling to the _Nie pozwalam_, to
the _liberum veto_. So, respecting this _jus Poloniæ_ let us say that
those are fair reasons for advancing Mr Pater to such a position, while
admitting that he is somewhat less than either of his forerunners.

[Sidenote: _His frank Hedonism._]

His minority consists certainly not in faculty of expression, wherein he
is the superior of both, nor in fineness of appreciation, in which he is
at least the equal of either: but rather in a certain eclectic and
composite character, a want of definite four-square originality, which
has been remarkably and increasingly characteristic of the century
itself. In one point, indeed, he is almost entitled to the highest
place, but his claim here rests rather on a frank avowal and formulation
of what everybody had always more or less admitted, or by denying had
admitted the acceptance of it by mankind at large—to wit, the
_pleasure_-giving quality of literature. Even he, however, resolute
Hedonist as he was, falters sometimes in this respect—is afraid of the
plain doctrine that the test of goodness in literature is simply and
solely the spurt of the match when soul of writer touches reader’s soul,
the light and the warmth that follow.

[Sidenote: _His_ polytechny _and his style_.]

In two other main peculiarities or properties of his—the, we will not
say confusion but deliberate blending of different arts in method and
process, and the adoption (modifying it, of course, by his own genius)
of the doctrine of the “single word,”—he is again more of a transmitter
than of a kindler of the torch. The first proceeding had been set on
foot by Lessing in the very act of deprecating and exposing clumsy and
blind anticipations of it; the second was probably taken pretty straight
from Flaubert. But in the combination of all three, in the supplements
of mother-wit, and, above all, in the clothing of the whole with an
extraordinarily sympathetic and powerful atmosphere of thought and
style—in these things he stands quite alone, and nearly as much so in
his formulation of that new critical attitude which we have seen in
process of development throughout the present volume.

[Sidenote: _His formulation of the new critical attitude._]

The documents of his criticism are to be chiefly sought in the _Studies
in the History of the Renaissance_,[981] in parts of _Marius the
Epicurean_, and, of course, in the volume of _Appreciations_, and the
little collection of Essays reprinted from _The Guardian_.[982] The
posthumous books are less to he depended on, in consequence of Mr
Pater’s very strong tendency to _cuver son vin_—to alter and digest and
retouch. I do not know any place setting forth that view of criticism
which I have myself always held more clearly than the Preface of the
_Studies_. “To feel the virtue of the poet, or the painter, to disengage
it, to set it forth,—these are the three stages of the critic’s duty.”
The first (Mr Pater does not say this but we may) is a passion of
pleasure, passing into an action of inquiry; the second is that action
consummated; the third is the interpretation of the result to the world.

[Sidenote: The Renaissance.]

He never, I think, carried out his principles better than in his first
book, in regard to _Aucassin et Nicolette_, to Michelangelo, to Du
Bellay, as well as in parts of the “Pico” and “Winckelmann” papers. But
the method is almost equally apparent and equally helpful in the more
purely “fine art” pieces—the “Lionardo,” the “Botticelli,” the “Luca
della Robbia.” In that passage on the three Madonnas and the Saint Anne
of Da Vinci, which I have always regarded as the triumph both of his
style and of his method, the new doctrine (_not_ the old) of _ut pictura
poesis_ comes out ten thousand strong for all its voluptuous softness.
This is the way to judge Keats and Tennyson as well as Lionardo: nay, to
judge poets of almost entirely different kinds, from Æschylus through
Dante to Shakespeare. Expose mind and sense to them, like the plate of a
camera: assist the reception of the impression by cunning lenses of
comparison, and history, and hypothesis; shelter it with a cabinet of
remembered reading and corroborative imagination; develop it by
meditation, and print it off with the light of style:—there you have, in
but a coarse and half-mechanical analogy, the process itself.

[Sidenote: _Objections to its process._]

I fancy that objections to this proceeding take something like the
following form: “In the first place, the thing is too effeminate, too
patient, too submissive,—it substitutes a mere voluptuous enjoyment, and
a dilettante examination into the causes thereof, for a virile summoning
of the artist-culprit before the bar of Reason to give account of his
deeds. In the second, it is too facile, too _fainéant_. In the third, it
does not give sufficient advantage to the things which we like to call
‘great.’ The moments of pleasure are too much _atomised_: and though it
may be admitted that some yield larger, intenser, more continuous
supplies of moment than others, yet this is not sufficient.” Lastly
[this is probably always _subaud._, but seldom uttered except by the
hotter gospellers], “_We_ don’t believe in these ecstatic moments,
analysed and interpreted in tranquillity; we don’t feel them, and we
don’t want to feel them; and you are a nasty hedonist if you do feel
them.”

Which protest could, no doubt, be amplified, could, with no doubt also,
be supported to a certain extent. Nor is it (though he should placard
frankly the fact that he agrees in the main with Mr Pater) exactly the
business of the present historian to defend it at any length here,
inasmuch as he is writing a history, not a “suasory.” Let it only be
hinted in passing that the exceptions just stated seem inconclusive—that
the wanters of a sense cannot plead their want as an argument that no
others have it; that the process has certainly given no despicable
results; that it has seldom demonstrably failed as disastrously as the
antecedent rule-system; and, most of all, that nothing can be falser
than the charge of _fainéantise_ and dilettanteism. Only as “the last
corollary of many of an effort” can this critical skill also be attained
and maintained.

[Sidenote: _Importance of_ Marius the Epicurean.]

At any rate, though, as often happens to a man, he became rather more of
a preceptist and less of an impressionist afterwards, Mr Pater certainly
exemplified this general theory and practice in a very notable manner.
_Marius_ is full of both: it is much more than the _Wilhelm Meister_ of
the New Criticism. It is this which gives the critical attitude of
Flavian, the hero’s friend and inspirer, the supposed author of the
_Pervigilium_; this, which is the literary function of “Neo-Cyrenaicism”
itself—the μονόχρονος ἡδονή, the integral atom, or moment of pleasure,
being taken as the unit and reference-integer of literary value; this,
which gives the adjustment _ad hoc_ of the _Hermotimus_. The theory and
the practice take their most solid, permanent, and important form in
this most remarkable book, of which I find it hard to believe that the
copy, “From the Author,” which lies before me, reached me nearly twenty
years ago. The _Renaissance_ holds the first blooms and promises of
them; _Appreciations_ and the _Guardian Essays_ the later applications
and developments; but the central gospel is here.

[Sidenote: Appreciations _and the_ “Guardian” _Essays_.]

That the opening essays of these two latter books happen to contain
references to myself is a fact. But I fancy that this will not be the
main interest of them to posterity, nor, strange as it may seem, is it
their main interest to me.[983] The Essay on _Style_ which opens the
larger and more important book, is, I think, on the whole, the most
valuable thing yet written on that much-written-about subject. It
presents, indeed, as I have hinted, a certain appearance of “hedging,”
especially in the return to matter as the distinction between “good art”
and “great art,” which return, as easily rememberable and with a
virtuous high sound in it, appears to have greatly comforted some good
if not great souls. Certainly a pitcher of gold is in some senses
greater than a pitcher of pewter of the same design, especially if you
wish to dispose of it to Mr Polonius. A pewter amphora is again in some
senses greater than a pewter cyathus. But it does not seem to me that
this helps us much. How good, on the other hand, and how complete, is
that improvement upon Coleridge’s dictum, which makes Style consist in
the adequate presentation of the writer’s “sense of fact,” and the
criticism of the documents adduced! How valuable the whole, though we
may notice as to the writer’s selection of _prose_ literature as the
representative art of the nineteenth century, that this was _his_ art,
his in consummate measure, and that verse was not. Altogether, in short,
a great paper,—a “furthest” in certain directions.

There is an interesting tender, or rather pilot-boat, to this Essay in
the first of the _Guardian_ Reviews on “English Literature,” where the
texts are the present writer’s _Specimens_, Professor’s Minto’s _English
Poets_, Mr Dobson’s _Selections from Steele_, and one of Canon Ainger’s
many bits of yeoman’s service to Lamb. The relation is repeated between
the Wordsworth Essay in _Appreciations_ and a Wordsworth review among
the _Guardian_ sheaf: while something not dissimilar, but even more
intimate, exists between the “Coleridge” Essay and the introduction to
that poet in Mr Ward’s well-known book, which Introduction actually
forms part of the Essay itself. In the two former cases, actual passages
and phrases from the smaller, earlier, and less important work also
appear in the larger and later. For Mr Pater—as was very well known,
when more than thirty years ago it was debated in Oxford whether he
would ever publish anything at all, and as indeed might have been seen
from his very first work, by any one with an eye, but with no personal
knowledge—was in no sense a ready writer, and, least of all, anxious to
write as he ran, that those who run might read. There have been critics
who, without repeating themselves, and even, perhaps, with some useful
additions and variations, could write half a dozen times on the same
subject; and indeed most literary subjects admit of such writing. But
such (we need not say frivolity but) flexibility was not in accordance
with Mr Pater’s temperament.

There is hardly one of the papers in either book (though some of the
_Guardian_ pieces are simple, yet quite honest and adequate reviews)
that does not display that critical attitude which we have defined
above, both directly and in relation to the subjects. The most
interesting and important passages are those which reveal in the critic,
or recognise in his authors, this attitude itself—as when we read of
Amiel: “In Switzerland it is easy to be pleased with scenery. But the
record of such pleasure becomes really worth while when, as happens with
A., we feel that there has been and, with success, an intellectual
effort to get at the secret, the precise motive, of this pleasure—to
define feeling.” Indeed, I really do not know that “to define feeling”
is not as good—it is certainly as short—a definition of at least a great
part of the business of the critic as you can get. And so again of Lamb:
“To feel strongly the charm of an old poet or moralist,... and then to
interpret that charm, to convey it to others,... this is the way of his
criticism.”

It is certainly the way of Mr Pater’s, and it is always good to walk
with him in it—better, I venture to think, than to endeavour to follow
him in his rarer and never quite successful attempts to lift himself off
it, and flutter in the vague. Good, for instance, as is the Essay on
“Æsthetic Poetry,” it would have been far better if it had contented
itself with being, in fact and in name, what it is in its best parts—a
review of Mr William Morris.[984] This, however, was written very early,
and before he had sent out his spies to the Promised Land in _The
Renaissance_ (and they had brought back mighty bunches of grapes!),
still more before he had reached the Pisgah of _Marius_. Even here
though, and naturally still more in the much later paper on Rossetti, he
presents us, as he does almost everywhere, with admirable, sometimes
with consummate, examples of “defined feeling” about Wordsworth and
Coleridge, about Browning and Lamb, about Sir Thomas Browne (one of his
most memorable things), about more modern persons—Mr Gosse, M. Fabre, M.
Filon. Particularly precious are the three papers on Shakespeare. I have
always wished that Mr Pater had given us more of them, as well as others
on authors possessing more of what we may call the _positive_ quality,
than those whom he actually selected. It would, I think, speaking
without impertinence, have done him some good: and it would, speaking
with certainty, have done us a great deal. One may sometimes think that
it was in his case (as in some others, though so few!) almost a pity
that he was in a position to write mainly for amusement. But it is not
likely that his sequestered and sensitive genius could ever have done
its best—if it could have done anything at all—at forced draught. So, as
usual, things are probably better as they are.

[Sidenote: _Universality of his method._]

What, however, is not probable but certain, and what is here of most
importance, is that the Paterian method is co-extensive in possibility
of application with the entire range of criticism—from the long and slow
degustation and appreciation of a Dante or a Shakespeare to the rapidest
adequate review of the most trivial and ephemeral of books. Feel;
discover the source of feeling (or no feeling, or disgust, as it will
often be in the trivial cases); express the discovery so as to
communicate the feeling: this can be done in every case. And if it
cannot be done by every person, why, that is only equivalent to saying
that it is not precisely possible for everybody to be a critic, which,
again, is a particular case of a general proposition announced in choice
Latin a long time ago, practically anticipated in choicer Greek long
before, and no doubt perfectly well understood by wise persons of all
nations and languages at any time back to the Twenty-third of October
B.C. 4004, or any other date which may be preferred thereto. Besides the
objections before referred to, there may be others—such as that the
critic’s powers, even if he possesses them, will become callous by too
much exercise,—an objection refuted by the fact, so often noticed, that
there is hardly an instance of a man with real critical powers becoming
a worse critic as he grew older, and many a one of his becoming a
better. But, at any rate, this was Mr Pater’s way of criticism: this had
already been the way pursued, more or less darkling or in clear vision,
by all modern critics—the way first definitely formulated, and, perhaps,
allowing for bulk of work, most consistently pursued, by himself. And I
have said—perhaps often enough—that I do not know a better.

[Sidenote: _Mr J. A. Symonds._]

Although the relation of “moon” to “sun,” so often used as an image in
literary history, will not work with pedantic exactness in relation to
Mr J. A. Symonds and the critic just mentioned,—for the moon is not many
times more voluminous than the sun, and there are other difficulties,—it
applies to a certain extent. Both were literary Hedonists; both were
strongly influenced by Greek and Italian. But Mr Symonds’s mind, like
his style, was very much more irregular and undisciplined than Mr
Pater’s (which had almost something of Neo-classic precision adjusting
its Romantic luxuriance), and this want of discipline let him loose[985]
into a loquacity which certainly deserved the Petronian epithet of
_enormis_, and could sometimes hardly escape the companion one of
_ventosa_. His treatise on _Blank Verse_,[986] interesting as it is,
would give the enemy of the extremer “modern” criticism far too many
occasions to blaspheme by its sheer critical anti-nomianism: and over
all his extensive work, faults of excess of various kinds swarm. But
beauties and merits are there in ample measure as well as faults: and in
the literary parts of _The Renaissance in Italy_ the author has
endeavoured to put some restraint on himself, and has been rewarded for
the sacrifice. From some little acquaintance with literary history, I
think I may say that there is no better historical treatment of a
foreign literature in English. One can never help wishing that the
author had left half his actual subject untouched, and had completed the
study of Italian literature.[987]

[Sidenote: _Thomson (“B. V.”)_]

Not much need be said of the critical production—arrested, like the
poetical, by causes unhappy but well known—of James Thomson “the
Second,” hardly “the Less,” but most emphatically “the Other.” It ought
to have been good: and sometimes (especially under the unexpected and
soothing shadow of _Cope’s Tobacco Plant_) was so.[988] Thomson had much
of the love, and some of the knowledge, required; his intellect (when
allowed to be so) was clear and strong; he was, in more ways than one,
of the type of those poets who have made some of the best critics,
despite the alleged prodigiousness of the metamorphosis. But the good
seed was choked by many tares of monstrous and fatal growth. The least
of these should have been (but perhaps was not) the necessity of working
for a living, and not the necessity, but the provoked and accepted doom,
of working for it mostly in obscure and unprofitable, not to say
disreputable, places, imposed upon a temperament radically nervous,
“impotent,” in the Latin sense, and unresigned to facts. That
temperament itself was a more dangerous obstacle: and the recalcitrance
to religion which it was allowed to induce was one more dangerous still.
There are no doubt many instances where rigid orthodoxy has proved
baneful, even destructive, to a man’s critical powers, or at any rate to
his catholic exertion of them: but there are also many in which it has
interfered little, if at all. On the other hand, I can hardly think of a
case in which religious, and of very few in which political, heterodoxy
has not made its partisans more or less hopelessly uncritical on those
with whom they disagree. Nor could the peculiar character of Thomson’s
education and profession fail to react unfavourably on his criticism. It
is hard to get rid of some ill effects of schoolmastering in any case;
it must be nearly impossible, in the case of a proud and rather
“ill-conditioned” man, who has not enjoyed either full liberal education
or gentle breeding, and who is between the upper and nether millstone,
as Thomson seems to have been, or at least felt himself, while he was a
military schoolmaster. All these irons entered into a critical soul
which might have been a fair one and brave: and we see the scars of
them, and the cramp of them, too often.[989]

[Sidenote: _William Minto._]

A journalist for one-half of his working life, and a professor—partly—of
literature for the other, William Minto executed in both capacities a
good deal of literary work: but his most noteworthy contribution[990] to
our subject consisted in the two remarkable manuals of English literary
history which, as quite a young man, he drew up.[991] To say that these
manuals were at the time of their publication by far the best on the
subject would be to say little: for there were hardly any good ones.
Their praise can be more of a cheerfully positive, and less of a
“rascally, comparative” character. They were both, but especially the
_Poets from Chaucer to Shirley_, full of study, insight, originality,
and grasp—where the author chose to indulge his genius. [Sidenote: _His
books on English Prose and Poetry._] Their defects were defects which it
requires genius indeed, or at least a very considerable share of
audacity, to keep out of manuals of the kind. There is, perhaps, too
much biography and too much mere abstract of contents—a thing which will
never serve the student in lieu of reading, which will sometimes
disastrously suggest to him that he need not read, and which must always
curtail the space available for really useful guidance and critical
illumination to him when he does. In the _Prose_ there is something
else. The book is constructed as a sort of enlarged _praxis_ on a
special pedagogic theory of style-teaching, that of the late Professor
Bain: and is elaborately scheduled for the illustration of Qualities and
Elements of Style, of Kinds of Composition. There is no need to discuss
how far the schedule itself is faulty or free from fault; it is
unavoidable that rigid adjustment to it—or to any such—shall bring back
those faults of the old Rhetoric on which we commented in vol. i., with
others more faulty than themselves. For classical literature was very
largely, if not wholly, constructed according to such schemes, and might
be analysed with an eye on them: English literature had other inceptions
and other issues. That Minto’s excellent critical qualities do not
disappear altogether behind the lattice-work of schedule-reference
speaks not a little for them.

[Sidenote: _H. D. Traill._]

Few writers have lost more by the practice of anonymous journalism than
the late Mr Traill. He engaged in it, and in periodical writing
generally, from a period dating back almost to the time of his leaving
Oxford,[992] and he had to do with it, I believe, till his death, the
extraordinary quality of his work recommending him to any and every
editor who knew his business. It was impossible, in reading any proof of
his, be it on matters political, literary, or miscellaneous, not to
think of Thackeray’s phrase about George Warrington’s articles, as to
“the sense, the satire, and the scholarship” which characterised them.
In the rather wide knowledge, which circumstances happened to give me,
of writers for the press during the last quarter of the nineteenth
century, I never knew his equal for combination of the three. [Sidenote:
_His critical strength._] For a great many years, however, chance, or
choice, or demand, directed him chiefly to the most important, as it is
thought, and the most paying, but the most exhausting and, as far as
permanent results go, the most utterly thankless and evanescent division
of journalism—political leader-writing, with actual attendance at “the
House” during the Session. And this curtailed both his literary
press-work and his opportunities of literary book-work. He did, however,
a great deal of the former: and the labours of the much-abused but
sometimes useful literary resurrection-men, who dig contributions out of
their newspaper graves, could hardly be better bestowed than upon him.
Fortunately, however, the literary side of his criticism—he was a critic
of letters and life alike, born and bred, in prose and in verse, by
temper and training, in heart and brain—remains in part of _The New
Lucian_, in the admirable monographs on Sterne and Coleridge,[993] and
in the collection of Essays[994] issued but a year or two before his
death.

[Sidenote: _On Sterne and Coleridge._]

In the three last-named volumes especially, his qualities as a critic
are patent to any one with eyes. The two monographs are models of
competence and grasp, but they are almost greater models of the
combination of vigour and sanity. Both subjects are of the kind which
used to tempt to cant, and which now tempts to paradox. To the first sin
Mr Traill had no temptation—whatever fault might have been found with
him, neither Pecksniffery nor Podsnappery was in the faintest degree his
failing. But he might have been thought likely to be tempted, as some
very clever men in our day have been, by the desire to fly in the face
of the Philistine, and to flout the Family Man. There is no trace of any
such beguilement—the moral currency is as little tampered with as it
could have been by Johnson or by Southey, while there is no trace of the
limitations of the one or of the slight Pharisaism of the other. And yet
the literary judgment is entirely unaffected by this moral rectitude:
the two do not trespass on each other’s provinces by so much as a
hair’s-breadth.

[Sidenote: _Essays on Fiction._]

The title-paper of the collected _Essays_, “The New Fiction,” connects
itself with several other pieces in the volume, “The Political Novel,”
“Samuel Richardson,” “The Novel of Manners,” and, to some extent, “The
Future of Humour.” Mr Traill was a particularly good critic of the most
characteristic product of the nineteenth century: I doubt whether we
have had a better. In poetry he seemed to me to sin a little, in one
direction (just as, I know, I seemed to him to sin in the other), by
insisting, too much in the antique fashion, on a general unity and
purpose. He shows this, I think, here in the paper on “Matthew Arnold,”
who, indeed, himself could hardly have objected, for they were
theoretically much at one on the point. But as to prose fiction he had
no illusions, and his criticism of it is consummate. We have not a few
instances of onslaughts upon corrupt developments of the art by critics
great and small; but I do not think I know one to equal Mr Traill’s
demolition of the “_grime_-novel” of to-day or yesterday. [Sidenote:
“_The Future of Humour._”] His highest achievement, however, in a single
piece, is undoubtedly “The Future of Humour,” which transcends mere
reviewing, transcends the mere _causerie_, and unites the merits of both
with those of the best kind of abstract critical discussion. One may say
of it, without hesitation, _Ça restera_; it may be lost in the mass, now
and then, but whenever a good critic comes across it he will restore it
to its place. It is _about_ a day, but not _of_ or _for_ it: it moves,
and has its being, as do all masterpieces of art, small and great, _sub
specie æternitatis_. If it were not so idle, one could only sigh at
thinking how many a leading article, how much journey-work in biography,
one would give for Traill to be alive again, and to write such criticism
as this.

[Sidenote: _Others: Mansel, Venables, Stephen, Lord Houghton, Pattison,
           Church, &c._]

Others, great and small, we must once more sweep into the _numerus_
named, or unnamed. Mr Traill himself—for they were both of St John’s—may
be said to have directly inherited the mantle of Dean Mansel in respect
of critical wit and sense, though the Dean had only occasionally devoted
these qualities, together with his great philosophical powers, and his
admirable style, to pure literary criticism.[995] Of the immense
critical exercise of Mr George Venables, a little lacking in
flexibility, sympathy, and unction, but excellently sound and strong, no
salvage, I think, has ever been published: and though a good deal is
available from his yoke-fellow, Sir James Fitzjames Stephen,[996] this
latter’s tastes—as his father’s had done before, though in a different
direction—led him away from the purer literary criticism. Of three other
persons, eminent in their several ways, more substantive notice may
perhaps have been expected by many, and will certainly be demanded by
some. But Lord Houghton’s _Monographs_,[997] admirably written and
extremely interesting to read, hardly present a sufficiently individual
kind, or a sufficiently considerable bulk of matter, for a separate
paragraph. Mr Mark Pattison’s dealings with Milton and with Pope, as
well as with the great seventeenth-century scholars, may seem more, and
more imperatively, to knock for admission. As far as scholarship, in
almost every sense of the word, is concerned, no critic can surpass him;
but scholarship, though all but indispensable as the critic’s _canvass_,
needs much working upon, and over, to give the finished result. And
Pattison’s incurable reticence and recalcitrance—the temperament which
requires the French words _rêche_ and _revêche_, if not even _rogue_, to
label it—were rebel to the suppleness and _morigeration_ which are
required from all but mere scholastic critics. The happier stars or
complexion of his near contemporary, Dean Church, enabled him to do some
admirable critical work on Dante, on Spenser, and on not a few others,
which will be found in the _English Men of Letters_, in Mr Ward’s
_Poets_, in his own Collected _Essays_, and in separate books. Dr Church
combined, with an excellent style, much scholarship and a judgment as
sane as it was mild, nor did he allow the natural drift of his mind
towards ethical and religious, rather than purely literary,
considerations to draw him too much away from the latter.

[Sidenote: _Patmore._]

Mr Coventry Patmore has been extolled to the skies by a coterie. But to
the cool outsider his criticism, like his poetry, has somewhat too much
the character of “diamondiferous rubbish,”—a phrase which, when applied
to the poetry itself, did not, I am told, displease him. For though, in
_Principle in Art_[998] and _Religio Poetæ_[999] there may be a few
things rich and rare, there is a very large surplusage of the _other_
constituents of the mixture. The short articles of the first volume
consist almost wholly of it, and might have been left in the columns of
the Daily Paper in which they appeared with a great deal of
advantage.[1000] Indeed those on Keats, Shelley, Blake, and Rossetti,
which unfortunately follow each other, make a four-in-hand good only for
the knacker. Mr Patmore, when he wrote them, was too old to take the
benefit of _no_-clergy, to be allowed the use of undergraduate paradox.
And as, unfortunately, he was a craftsfellow, and a craftsfellow not
very popular or highly valued with most people, his denigration is all
the more awkward. A man who says that _The Burden of Nineveh_ “might
have been written by Southey” (and I do not undervalue Southey), must
have an insensible spot somewhere in his critical body. A man who says
that Blake’s poetry, “with the exception of four or five pieces and a
gleam here and there,” is mere drivel, must be suffering from critical
hemiplegia. There are better things in the other volume, and its worst
faults are excesses of praise, always less disgusting, though not always
less uncritical, than those of blame. But I am not here giving a full
examination to Mr Patmore’s criticism, I am only indicating why I do not
here examine it, as I am perfectly ready to do at any moment in a proper
place.

[Sidenote: _Mr Edmund Gurney._]

There were, I think, few English writers of the last quarter of the
nineteenth century who showed more of the true critical _ethos_ than the
late Mr Edmund Gurney. I did not know Mr Gurney myself, but most of my
friends did; a situation in which there is special danger (when the
friends are complimentary) of the fate of Aristides for the other
person. But the good things which were told me of Mr Gurney I find to be
very much more than confirmed by his books, though, of course, I also
find plenty to disagree with. The earlier of them, _The Power of
Sound_,[1001] is in the main musical; and I have generally found (though
there are some capital exceptions) that critics of poetry, or of
literature generally, who start from much musical knowledge, are
profoundly unsatisfactory, inasmuch as they rarely appreciate the
radical difference between musical music and poetical music. Even
Mitford fails here. But Mr Gurney does not. He was the first, or one of
the first, I think, in English to enunciate formally the great truth
that “the setting includes a new substance”—meaning not merely the
technical music-setting of the composer, but that “sound accompaniment”
which, in all poetry more or less, and in English poetry of the
nineteenth century especially, gives a bonus, adds a _panache_, to the
meaning.

[Sidenote: The Power of Sound.]

He was right too, I have not the slightest doubt, in laying it down that
“metrical rhythm is imposed upon, not latent in, speech”; and he went
right, where too many scholars of high repute have gone wrong, in seeing
that the much-decried English scansion-pronunciation of Latin almost
certainly brings out _to an English ear_ the effect on a Latin one,
better than any conjectured attempt to mimic what might have been the
Latin pronunciation itself. I was delighted to find that he, too, had
fixed upon Tennyson’s “Fair is her cottage” (his is not quite my view,
and perhaps we were both guided by a reported speech of Mr Spedding’s)
as almost the _ne plus ultra_ of “superadded” audible and visual effect
combined. And he is well worth reading on certain “illusions” of
Lessing’s.

[Sidenote: Tertium Quid.]

The literary part of _The Power of Sound_ is, however, if not
accidental, incidental mainly: not a few of the papers in the second
volume of _Tertium Quid_[1002] deal with literature pure and simple.
They are to some extent injured by the fact that many, if not most of
them, are merely strokes, or parries, or _ripostes_, in particular duels
or _mêlées_ on dependences of the moment. And, as I have pointed out in
reference to certain famous altercations of the past, these critical
squabbles seem to me almost invariably to darken counsel—first, by
leading the disputants away from the true points, and secondly, by
inducing them to mix in their pleadings all sorts of flimsy, ephemeral,
and worthless matter. Not the point, but what Jones or Brown has said
about the point, becomes the object of the writer’s attention; he wants
to score off Brown or Jones, not to score for the truth. So when Mr
Gurney contended with the late Mr Hueffer—another literary-musical
critic, who did _not_, as Mr Gurney did, escape the dangers of the
double employ—when he contributed not so much a _tertium_ as a _quartum
quid_ to the triangular duel of Mr Arnold, Mr Austin, Mr Swinburne about
Byron—he did not always say what is still worth reading. And he makes
one or two odd blunders, such as that the French are blind to
Wordsworth, whereas Wordsworth’s influence on Sainte-Beuve, to name
nobody else,[1003] was very great. But he is always sensible,[1004] and
he always has that double soundness on the passionate side of poetry and
on the peculiar appeal of its form, which is so rare and so distinctive
of the good critic.

These qualities should, of course, appear in his essay on the
“Appreciation of Poetry”;[1005] and they do. It is, however, perhaps
well to note that, while quite sound on the point that there is a right
as well as a wrong comparison, he, like others, hardly escapes the
further danger of “confusing the confusion”—of taking what is really the
right comparison for what is really the wrong. The comparison which
disapproves one thing because it is unlike another is wrong, not the
comparison which is used to bring out a fault, though the unlikeness is
not assigned as the reason of the fault at all. But I am here slipping
from history to doctrine on this particular point. I think Mr Gurney,
right in the main, might have been still _righter_: but in general I am
sure that he had admirable critical qualities, and I only wish he had
chosen, or had been forced, to use them more fully and frequently.[1006]




                              CHAPTER IV.

                        LATER GERMAN CRITICISM.

HEINE: DECEPTIVENESS OF HIS CRITICISM—IN THE ‘ROMANTISCHE SCHULE,’ AND
    ELSEWHERE—THE QUALITIES AND DELIGHTS OF IT—SCHOPENHAUER—VIVIDNESS
    AND ORIGINALITY OF HIS CRITICAL OBSERVATION—‘DIE WELT ALS WILLE,’
    ETC.—GRILLPARZER—HIS MOTTO IN CRITICISM—HIS RESULTS IN APHORISM, AND
    IN INDIVIDUAL JUDGMENT—A CRITIC OF LIMITATIONS: BUT A CRITIC—
    CARRIÈRE: HIS ‘ÆSTHETIK’—LATER GERMAN SHAKESPEARE-CRITICS—GERVINUS:
    HIS “GERMAN POETRY”—ON BÜRGER—THE SHAKESPEARE-HERETICS: RÜMELIN—
    FREYTAG—HILLEBRAND AND COSMOPOLITAN CRITICISM—NIETZSCHE—
    ‘ZARATHUSTRA,’ THE ‘BIRTH OF TRAGEDY,’ AND ‘DER FALL WAGNER’—
    ‘UNZEITGEMÄSSE BETRACHTUNGEN’—‘LA GAYA SCIENZA’—‘JENSEITS VON GUT
    UND BÖSE,’ ETC.—‘GÖTZEN-DÄMMERUNG’—HIS GENERAL CRITICAL POSITION.


The volume of critical writing in Germany since Goethe’s death, and the
deaths of those younger contemporaries of his, like Tieck and A. W.
Schlegel, who were mentioned in our last chapter on the subject,[1007]
has been, of course, very great. The unceasing literary and scientific
industry of the nation (with, in particular, the habit of the doctoral
thesis forming almost an obligatory part of the regular education of any
man pretending to culture) has made books of more or less critical
intent and content as the sands of the sea. Yet the determination of the
national critical temperament towards abstract æsthetic, or towards the
most rudimentary and literal duties of _Quellenforschung_, of tabulation
of rhyme and word-form, and the like, together with the custom (most
fatal of all those encouraged by the thesis habit) of constantly
“shoddying-up” former inquiries into fresher form, has prevented much of
the very best kind of work from being done. If it were not for Heine,
Schopenhauer, and one other who may come more as a surprise, in the
earlier part, and the singular, erratic, and mainly wasted genius of
Nietzsche in the later, this chapter would cut a very rueful figure
beside most others in the book. Nor was any one of these primarily a
literary critic.[1008]

[Sidenote: _Heine: deceptiveness of his criticism._]

Heinrich Heine[1009] did many wonderful and many delightful things; but
though he certainly did many things more delightful, I do not know that
he ever did anything more wonderful than in making _Die Romantische
Schule_ persuade divers folk that he, the author of the _Nord-See_ in
his morning, the author of Bimini when the night had almost fallen, was
anything but a Romantic himself. This curious achievement shows the
dangers that wait upon those who peruse his criticism. If they cannot
remember that a man very frequently blasphemes, in jest or temper, what
he loves and adores, if they have not graven on their souls Lamb’s lines
which culminate in

                      “Not that she is truly so”—

they had much better not read Heine at all. For he will lead them into
many foolish and hurtful errors, and direct them, as by his own account
he actually did certain poor people in his impish days, to the sign of
the Stone Jug as the most comfortable and respectable hotel in
Göttingen.[1010]

[Sidenote: _In the_ Romantische Schule, _and elsewhere_.]

To put at once out of controversy what ought never to have been in it,
let any one compare the famous passage or passages in _The Romantic
School_[1011] about the Schlegels, with all their fantastic and
contemptuous satire, and the serious passage about them in the much less
well-known article on Menzel.[1012] Nay, let any man accustomed to sift
evidence compare the more serious part of the “Romantic School” passages
themselves with the less serious ones, and he will not have much doubt
left on the manner. Heine was not only one of those persons who “cannot
get enough fighting,” but one of those who always prefer the most
fantastic, the most unconventional, I fear one must in some cases say
the most unsportsmanlike, tactics and methods. He would have liked the
_savate_ better than the formal rules of the English ring, with their
pruderies about hitting below the belt and using your feet: and I think
his favourite weapon would have been that ingenious Irish implement the
Gae-Bulg, with which the great Cuchullain slew somebody else nearly as
great whose name abides not with me—a short, many-barbed harpoon which
you kicked from between your toes upwards, into the under and
unprotected part of the opponent’s stomach. The Middle Ages were
actually the most representative times of Christian literature: and had
been made even too much of as such by the school he was attacking. This
offended his Judaism, that equally passionate and unpractical form of
religion. He knew—it is one of his great critical deliverances—that if
the Romantic is not always the mediæval, the mediæval is almost always
the Romantic. And so at times there was no mercy for mediævalism and
Romanticism. At other times he went and wrote, or had already written,
_Don Ramiro_ and _Das Liedchen von der Reue_, and _Mein süsses Lieb,
wenn du im Grab_, and _Die alten bösen Lieder_, and _Ich bin die
Prinzessin Ilse_, and the best things in the _Nord-See_ itself, and the
nineteenth chapter of _Atta Troll_, and nearly the whole of the
_Romancero_, and _Bimini_!

[Sidenote: _The qualities and delights of it._]

With such a man the critical letter killeth, unless you crush the snake
on the wound, and, as the scientific people say now (justifying, like
all real new wisdom, the wisdom of old), set free the antidote which the
snake’s own blood contains for its own safety against its venom. Never
was any so liberal of this antidote, without even the trouble of
crushing, so easy to charm, so _self-charming_, as Heine. As he says
himself,[1013] “the laughter sticks in his throat,” too often and too
evidently: and all but the dullest ears should hear the sob that chokes
it. But, unfortunately, there are ears in this world that _are_ dull of
hearing; there are even several of them. And for these, as a critic,
Heine is not.[1014]

For others he is perhaps the chief, and certainly one of the earliest,
of those who have discovered that the Goddess of Criticism is really
all the different Muses in turn, and that she can be Thalia as well as
Clio. There is still an idea that the critic ought to be very serious:
and this Heine certainly was not—at least consecutively—while he was
not even quite master of his own seriousness when he had it. There is,
for an Englishman, no more agreeable spectacle of the kind than the
delightful struggle of Shakespeareolatry and Anglophobia in
_Shakespeare’s Mädchen und Frauen_.[1015] All the Victor Hugo
passages[1016] should be carefully compared, remembering of course
that the half of Hugo had not been told to Heine. So should all the
Goethe pieces,[1017] remembering, again, the interview, when the
younger poet could find nothing to say to the elder but that the
wayside plums between Jena and Weimar were good. Read him on Hoffmann
and Novalis,[1018] and remember that it is not exactly everybody—not
even every Heine (if indeed there could be more Heines than one)—that
can appreciate Novalis _and_ Hoffmann together. In fact read him
everywhere: but whenever you begin to read him, remember two little
sentences of his, and if you cannot understand and enjoy them, shut
the book. The one is that[1019] about the orange-trees at Sans-Souci
whereof “every one has its number, like a contributor to Brockhaus’s
_Konversationsblatte_.” The other is the pronouncement that “without
the Will of the Lord no sparrow falls from the housetop, and
Government-Councillor Karl Streckfuss makes no verse.” These will
serve as useful tuning-forks, and they are not difficult to carry
about and use.

In fine, Heine is a dangerous model, no doubt; yet even as a model he
gave something to Criticism which it had not possessed before, which
even Voltaire was unable to give it, because _his_ laughter was too far
removed from tears. Heine’s humour too often turned to the humoursome:
but it was always present. And Humour is to the critic very nearly what
Unction is to the preacher, in its virtue as well as in its danger.
Moreover if he could certainly hate he could as certainly love—could not
help loving. And when you find Love and Humour together, they and you
are not far from the critical Kingdom of Heaven.[1020]

[Sidenote: _Schopenhauer._]

The critical work of Schopenhauer[1021] is partly to be found in his
great book, but it there assumes forms which are not of those with which
we chiefly busy ourselves, while the critical sections of the _Parerga
und Paralipomena_[1022] are ours—“stock, lock, and barrel”—a familiar
metaphor which ceases to be hackneyed in face of the peculiar
combativeness of Schopenhauer’s thought and style. They have all the
refreshing quality of audacious originality and crisp phrase,[1023] and
they have perhaps less than is the case elsewhere the perverseness—in
fact, the mere ill-temper—which was the result, partly of his dreary
creed, partly of the injustice with which he considered himself to be
treated by the _Verdammte Race_.

[Sidenote: _Vividness and originality of his critical observation._]

In these latter moods he is sometimes very amusing, as where he speaks
of “a disgusting jargon like the French,”[1024] or whenever he mentions
Fichte, Schelling, or Hegel; but in them few men are critical, and
Schopenhauer is certainly not one of the few. One might make a not
uninteresting critical postil or _annotatiuncula_ on the enthusiasm of
this pessimist for Scott: but it would be a slight divagation. Read all
that he has to say on Style;[1025] it is the best thing, I think, that
has ever been written on that subject in German, and one of the best
things ever written in any language. It is conspicuously free from the
old jest (repeated after Diderot on Beccaria so often) that there is
nothing of his subject in his treatment; and we may forgive him for
denouncing Parenthesis, when we remember the misconduct of the Germans
towards that delightfullest of Figures. Among his numerous judgments, of
more wisdom than mercy, none is better suited for these times (in which
the evil, bad in his own, has grown worse) than his condemnation of the
idea that “the last work is always the best,” that “what is written
later is always an improvement on what was written before.”[1026] Nor is
Schopenhauer’s anathema on reading pure and simple too strong, if it be
taken with the grain of salt always necessary as seasoning to his strong
meat—which grain is in this place the addition, “what is not worth
reading, and what is merely _new_.”[1027]

Nor (as though he could leave no literary fault of his and our time
untransfixed) does he spare the labour lost on biography and inquiry
into originals and the like—“the analysing,” as he calls it, “of clay
and paint instead of admiring the shape and colour of the vase.”[1028]
No critic, who is not very uncertain of himself, need be annoyed by the
characteristic observation on the critical faculty, “there is _for the
most part_ no such thing.”[1029] For each of us may flatter himself that
he is the exception, and need have no doubt about the rule. And, as a
matter of fact, Schopenhauer proceeds to show that there _is_ a critical
faculty, and that he knows very well what it is, and that he has it. If
he condemns comparison, it is only what we have so often called the
wrong comparison; he lays the very strongest emphasis on the Golden Rule
of Criticism—that a poet, or any writer, is to be judged by his best
things. On the old subject of the value of immediate and popular
recognition, he is perhaps too interested a judge: and there is also
evident temper in his exhortation to critics to “scourge mercilessly,”
his doctrine that “Politeness in criticism is injurious.” As the world
goes, the critic who accepts it as his first duty to scourge
mercilessly, to neglect politeness, is quite as likely to scourge the
few good books as the many bad, and will certainly do _himself_
irreparable harm. So, also, while recognising the nobility of much that
Schopenhauer has written on genius,[1030] we shall perhaps think that
his encomia on arrogance and his disapproval of modesty are slightly
unnecessary. Let us, at any rate, first light our largest lantern, and
go out in the brightest day our climate allows, to find these modest
men.

[Sidenote: Die Welt als Wille, &c.]

In the æsthetic section,[1031] main and appended, of his great book
itself, Schopenhauer concerns us less. It may be quite true[1032] that
the subjective part of æsthetic pleasure is delight in perceptive
knowledge, independent of Will; and the bass may be “the lowest grade of
the objectification” of the said Will. But according to the views,
perhaps wrongly but constantly maintained in this book, positions of
this kind have nothing to do with the discovery or the defence of any
concrete critical judgment whatsoever. We find of course—as we must find
in any man of Schopenhauer’s powerful intellect and wide knowledge—
divers interesting _aperçus_, not always or often conditioned by a tame
consistency. Thus[1033] he dislikes rhyme altogether, but sees, as not
everybody since has seen, and as comparatively few had seen before him,
the beauty of rhymed Mediæval Latin. The passage on the sublimity of
silence and solitude is an extremely fine one: and if his general
quarrel with the world puts him in an unnecessary temper with minor
poets,[1034] it is interesting to compare his attack on them with
Castelvetro’s.[1035] It would be very interesting, too, to compare and
connect his views on Poetry with his very celebrated opinions on Love:
but _non nostrum est_.[1036] And it is only when Schopenhauer touches
ethics that he is disputable; on æsthetic questions in the applied sense
he seldom goes wrong, and is always stimulating and original to the
highest degree.

[Sidenote: _Grillparzer._]

Our “surprise” is the Austrian poet, Grillparzer.[1037] I am told by
persons who know more about that matter than I do, that Grillparzer was
a remarkable playwright; I am sure that he is a remarkable critic. Four
volumes of his Works are devoted to this subject, and nearly the whole
of one of them[1038] is occupied by critical _pensées_ and aphorisms of
the kind in which Joubert is the great master. Grillparzer is not the
equal of the Frenchman, nor has he the depth of his countryman Novalis:
but his critical matter is more abundant than the latter’s, and it is of
a rather more practical kind. He seems, at all times of his long life,
to have practised, and he has explicitly, preached, what I myself
believe to be certainly the most excellent if not the only excellent way
of criticism. [Sidenote: _His motto in criticism._] The delivery unto
Satan of all theory, which I have put in the forefront of this Book, is
of course intentionally hyperbolical: yet what he puts in the forefront
of his own is quite sober. “My plan in these annotations is, without any
regard to system, to write down on each subject what seems to me to flow
out of its own nature. The resultant contradictions will either finally
clear themselves away, or, being irremovable, will show me that no
system is possible.” I am by no means sure that this was not the
practice of Aristotle; it pretty certainly was that of Longinus; I have
endeavoured to show that, pursued as it was by Dryden all through his
literary life, it made him a very great critic; and it was to no very
small extent (though in his case it was hampered and broken into by his
fatal inconsecutiveness) the method also of Coleridge. Grillparzer had
not the genius of these men: but he seems to have pursued his own method
faithfully for some fifty or sixty years, and the result is some mediate
axioms of very considerable weight, and a large body of individual
judgments which are at least of interest.

[Sidenote: _His results in aphorism,_]

The former are perhaps the better. He has even attempts at the
definition of Beauty, which are as good as another’s, holding that the
Beautiful not merely gives satisfaction and appeasement to the sensual
part in us, but also lifts up the soul.[1039] This, at least, escapes
the witty judgment of Burke quoted above, after Schlegel. He has the
combined boldness and good sense[1040] to see and say that “Sense _is_
prose”—to cry woe on the poetry that can be fully explained by the
understanding. He has dealt a swashing blow[1041] at a terribly large
part of ancient and modern criticism in the words, “Pottering,
[“Schlendrian,”] and Pedantry in Art always delight in judging by Kinds—
approving this and denouncing that. But an open Art—sense knows no
Kinds: only individuals.” He is interesting and distinctly original on
Dilettanteism:[1042] stigmatises in women (I fear he might have added
not a few men) the “inability to admire what you do not wholly
approve,”[1043] and says plumply,[1044] _Klassisch ist fehlerfrei_, a
proposition which begs the question as little as any on a question that
is always begged.

Nearly all his aphorisms on poetry and prose blend neatness and adequacy
well, as this:[1045] “Prose and Poetry are like a journey and a walk.
The object of the journey lies at its end: of the walk, in the walking.”
Nay, he is blunter still, and to some people perhaps quite shocking, in
comparing the two to eating and drinking.[1046] A text for a weighty
critical sermon might, I think, be found in an aphorism of his,[1047]
which is not easy to translate into English without periphrasis: and
though he does not often venture upon the complicatedly figurative,
there is another[1048] about Islands which I wish Mr Arnold had known,
that he might have given us a pendant to _Isolation_. In fact, in these
meditations of his, Grillparzer, though never pretentiously Delphic, is
always for thoughts.

[Sidenote: _and in individual judgment._]

The very large body[1049] of individual judgments on literature, ancient
and modern, with which he supports these, and from which, in part no
doubt, he drew them, is, on the whole though not wholly, a little
inferior. But we can see the reason for this inferiority where it
exists, and even then it does not make him worthless. He has somewhat
imperfect sympathies. On Shakespeare’s Sonnets[1050] he is not much
better than Hallam; his single judgment on Heine,[1051] though
studiously moderate, might almost be called studiously inadequate: and
in talking of Friedrich Schlegel he cannot forget the author of
_Lucinde_, or that when they once met at Naples, the future mystic and
Neo-Catholic ate too much, drank too much, and talked too greasily.
This, considering that he himself can admire _The Custom of the
Country_, seems a little hard.

[Sidenote: _A critic of limitations: but a critic._]

Grillparzer is, in fact, one of those critics in exploring whose region
one gets to be familiar with certain danger-signals which are not always
signals of danger only. As a practised playwright he speaks with special
interest on Shakespeare, and he has given us judgments on other
dramatists, which have not less. His appreciation, by no means
indiscriminate, of Beaumont and Fletcher[1052] is specially noteworthy,
and he has a whole volume on the Spanish Drama. I do not know whether
any of our modern Byron-worshippers are acquainted with his
estimate[1053] of their idol, whom he fully accepts as “the second
greatest English poet,” but of whom he gives an idea quite different
from the average Continental one. As a dramatist once more, and a man
with dramatic ideas, he is extremely hard on Lessing;[1054] but I do not
know an admiring critic of Goethe who is much better[1055] on that
difficult person. We know that he will not appreciate Walther von der
Vogelweide, though he has no strong anti-mediæval prejudice as such; and
he does not.[1056] Finally, let me give, as remarkable, his coupling of
Adam Smith’s _Wealth of Nations_ and A. W. Schlegel’s _Lectures on
Drama_ as “two of the most mischievous books of modern times for an
inexperienced understanding.” I am not satisfied with his calling Tieck
a “chattering noodle” (“Fasler”), but at any rate he calls Gervinus
“absurd.” He returns again and again to the charge against this latter
egregious person, who is still quoted by the compilers of Shakespeare
Hand-books and the writers of examination papers. If I had any need of
pardoning (which I have not, since I understand them) his remarks on
Walther, on the Sonnets, and on Heine, I would do it at once for the
exclamation, “Du lieber Himmel!” which he, a German, makes on Gervinus’s
most famous boast that “the English have left it to us Germans to do
full justice to their Shakespeare,” and for his explosion at the methods
by which “_bis aufs Blut_ wird alles erklärt.”[1057]

In short, I strongly recommend Grillparzer, about whom I have seen very
little in English, to study at the hands of those Englishmen who take an
interest in criticism. A very considerable man of letters himself, he
seems to have never, in the course of his long life, lost interest in
the work of others. He had some natural limitations, and they appear to
have been further tightened by his playwrightship and by the influence
of Joseph Schreyvogel, a sort of Austrian Nisard, of whom I do not know
much.[1058] But the quotations and account which I have given will, I
think, show that he had no small root of the critical matter in him, and
that in more than one or two instances he enunciated _and observed_
critical truths which are not exactly the stereotyped headings of the
critical copybook.

It is not necessary here, after what has been said repeatedly before, to
enter into any apology for not discussing the abstract Æsthetic of the
German nineteenth century. Even Hegel, though he is tempting, must be
omitted; for, as an authority of unsuspected competence[1059] observes
with some naïveté on this very point, “it is undoubtedly difficult to
get a net result out of Hegel,” and it is with net results that we are
concerned. But a disciple of his may be usefully discussed with
reference to the more general sides of the matter.

[Sidenote: _Carrière: his_ Æsthetik.]

The _Æsthetik_[1060] of Moritz Carrière is a sort of object-lesson on
its subject. The praises which have been bestowed on its style are quite
justified: there is no German book of the kind known to me that is
pleasanter to read. Its learning and its arrangement are all that can be
desired. And yet, as one reads it, the old reflections on _The Elements
of Criticism_ arise (with a difference of course) once more. The
impressions produced are rather those of a long course of elegant
sermons, with æsthetic substituted for theology, than of anything else.
Here you may read that women are smaller than men; that “as the noses of
children are small and stumpy, a _retroussé_ nose in the adult indicates
want of development, though with elegant culture [of the feature or the
person?] it may be naïve and roguish”; that dilettanti are always
plagiarists. The conclusion of the second volume, to the extent of
nearly two hundred pages, is devoted to Poetry, and is very good
reading. Sometimes whole pages are neatly woven of agreeable poetical
citations, or of dicta from more or less important persons,—“Schiller
says,” “Goethe observes,” and so on. We learn further how Music
“presents the idea as the principle and measure of the movement of life,
and connects the beauty of that which is to come with that of what is”—
like, say, a dinner-bell when one is talking to an agreeable person in a
pretty drawing-room. Observe that Herr Carrière is neither quack nor
twaddler; he does really feel the beauties about which he is talking.
Such a passage as that at the foot of p. 457, vol. ii., and the top of
the next, on Homer’s method of bringing scenes and figures before us, is
real criticism of a valuable kind,—not more, it is true, than a
corollary of Lessing’s propositions, but worth adding to them, for all
that. I know hardly anything more shrewdly and amusingly adjusted, as a
sort of æstheticised “Rhetoric” of the Hermogenean type, than the
remarks and illustrations about Figures, from that of the orator who
said, “Let us burn our ships and launch out boldly into the open sea,”
onwards. The attempts to connect different metres with distinctive
mental effects, or with separate classes of subject, are again most
ingenious. His defence of the rhymes of the _Nibelungenlied_ against the
characteristic criticism of Gervinus is admirable. In fact, the book is
almost everywhere, as Mr Weller would say, “wery pretty.”

Only—as we have so often been constrained to add in dealing with
critics, from the Greek Rhetoricians downwards—how much better employed
would this erudition, this taste, this ingenious adjustment of
exposition to example, have been upon individual and complete poems,
books, writers! These pieces, these selected examples, are after all
only branches torn from the living trunk, mutilated things, wanting
their context almost always to give them full beauty and their own
beauty. But this is not the worst: for at least on the doctrine of the
Poetic Moment they will sometimes give that moment. But they are
produced, not to give it but to exemplify a presumed classification and
analysis of the manner of its giving. They have to yield a formula: and
insensibly, inevitably, the heresy will grow upon the reader, that the
formula will yield _them_. It is as if some diabolical physiologist took
Helen from the arms of Paris or of Faustus, extracted her eyes, or tore
off her hair, or drew ounces of the half-divine blood from her veins,
dissected and analysed them, and said, “Gentlemen, this dissection
reconstituted, this analysis ‘made up,’ will give you what is required
to make you immortal.” But, alas! it will not. And the fact is, that
_no_ explanation of the manner in which the literary delight is produced
is ever general or true of any but the individual instance. That delight
is never the same twice running: these stars always have some, it may be
infinitesimal, but discernible and individualising, glory. Yet Herr
Carrière is a craftsmanlike and entertaining demonstrator of the
Undemonstrable.

[Sidenote: _Later German Shakespeare-critics._]

The performances of the later German Shakespeare-critics are so much
better known in England than almost any other part of the literature of
the subject that it seems unnecessary to devote much of our rapidly
disappearing space to them. Gervinus, Delius, Ulrici, Elze, have all
been translated, quoted, and so forth, with the curious deference to
foreign opinion in matters of taste, which has so oddly accompanied
English stiff-neckedness in general. [Sidenote: _Gervinus: his_ German
Poetry.] I am bound to say that I think not much of any of these
pundits;[1061] and least of all of their great Panjandrum Gervinus. His
critical quality, however, may be for our purpose better gauged by
taking his large work on German Poetry.[1062] It is an estimable book
enough; the author often says what he ought to have said, and does not
very often or very outrageously say what he should not. But the faults
of his Shakespeare-criticism—platitude, verbiage, attention to the
unnecessary, and avoidance of the heart and root of the matter, the
quality of Shakespeare as an English poet, mark this also. Take persons
most diverse in character, time, what you will—take Walther von der
Vogelweide, Hans Sachs, Opitz, Novalis, for instance—and read his
verdicts on them. You will find that in the first place he hardly ever
quotes or appreciates a _phrase_—in itself a tell-tale, and damagingly
tell-tale, abstinence. But you will also find, in compensation for this
reticence, a flood of general remark, (false) comparison, see-saw
antithesis, and the like. By no means his worst judgment, but a most
characteristic one, is that on Bürger, which I may partly translate,
partly summarise, from the original:[1063]—

[Sidenote: _On Bürger._]

“Bürger then appears to us as at once a pathological and a critical
poet, a poet of Nature and of Art, a poet of the people and of Love. He
belongs at once to the school of the North and to that of the South,
relies at once on sensations and reflections. His nature-painting is
apparently dashed on with a big brush, but it is careful in detail.
There is in him a fight of the Universal and the Particular, of Art and
Nature, of Endowment and Facility, of Poetry and Platitude.”

I do not know how many readers will sympathise with, or even understand,
the kind of rage which, I confess it, such criticism as this excites in
my mind. It is not exactly false criticism; on the contrary, it is
rather true. But its truth has nothing vital, nothing germinal, nothing
specially appropriate to the subject in it: and if there can be said to
be anything specially appropriate to the writer, it is only matter for
an unfavourable judgment of him. Any man, with a good deal of reading
and a little practice, can string tic-tac antitheses of this kind, made
up of critical commonplaces and terminology, together for pages. No man,
from anything of the kind, could grasp the real _differentia_ of Bürger—
the fact that he was one of the first to make, in poetry, an almost
convulsive attempt to get out of the conventional by attempting the
supernatural.

In all these German Shakespeare-critics, moreover, the fault (which we
have noticed even in Goethe) reappears, that they are criticising, not
Shakespeare, but the translation of Shakespeare; that while they have
plenty to say about the plot, and the “points in Hamlet’s soul,” and
even sometimes the text in its lower aspects, the other and over-soul,
the essence, the poetry, of Shakespeare not merely escapes, but
apparently fails to interest or occupy them at all. On the accidents,
the unnecessary things, they are voluble. “The rest is silence”—to
expand which text in its present bearing were an insult.

[Sidenote: _The Shakespeare-heretics: Rümelin._]

A word or two, however, may be given to the arch-heretic in this
division—the interesting Herr Rümelin.[1064] I find, in relation to this
subject, a MS. note, of no matter what author, which may deserve
quotation, despite the impropriety of its phraseology: “_Asinus
Rumelinus_. Asinity much invited by precedent asinity on the other
side.” And really there is something in this. It is not merely that Herr
Rümelin’s essay sets forth his thoughts as those _eines Realisten_, and
thus declares its author a reactionary partisan against Idealism and
Romanticism. By a quaint, but not uncommon, “suck of the current” he has
adopted not a few of the fallacies of the school he combats. It is
_their_ Shakespeare, not the Shakespeare of Shakespeare and eternity,
that he is belittling. We have seen how a sensible German like
Grillparzer treated Gervinus’s boast about Germany as Shakespeare’s
prophet. Rümelin’s demonstration that Shakespeare was forgotten in
England for 150 years is only this same boast altered a little. It is,
as every child ought to know now, and as I shall not here waste time in
proving, an absolute falsehood: but it could be of no importance to the
true critic if it were true. Gold scarcely ceases to be gold during the
time that it is, or because it is, _irrepertum_: and perhaps the only
thing that retains the slightest interest in this part of Herr Rümelin’s
examination is his use of the argument that Bacon does not mention
Shakespeare—a fertile source since of the finest mare’s-nests. But the
Essay is a really interesting one, and might have done—though I do not
know that it has done—much good to the chatterers about Shakespeare. The
Southampton chatter, the chatter about the greatness of the Elizabethan
period in connection with politics, &c., the chatter of Gervinus, the
chatter of the Romantics—against all these Rümelin directs an
anti-criticism, easy enough and sometimes not ineffective. As a Realist
he does not (we can easily see why) like the character-play. As a
Preceptist, he holds that Tragedy must not individualise, and that
scarcely one of Shakespeare’s dramas contains a _wohlgefügte
pragmatische denkbare Handlung_. As a mid-nineteenth century Liberal he
is pained to find that Shakespeare was a Royalist and an aristocrat of
the purest water. Comparing Shakespeare and Goethe (for there is much
mere Chauvinism in Rümelin), he finds that the one “flashes on things
like a rocket or a blue light,” while the other “shows them in a clear
mirror.” But after all he admits “the joy in the poet.” So perhaps this
poor heretic was not quite so far from the Kingdom of Heaven as Gervinus
and Ulrici, for in reading them you are seldom invited to consider “the
joy in the poet”—the Poetic Moment—at all.

We may conclude this chapter with notices of three later German critics,
who are, in different ways, interesting and characteristic—the novelist
Freytag; the cosmopolitan polygrapher, Karl Hillebrand; and the
greatest, if the maddest, man of letters of modern Germany—Nietzsche.

[Sidenote: _Freytag._]

For the first, Gustav Freytag’s _Technik des Dramas_[1065] could hardly
lack mention here as the principal contribution to criticism of the
chief novelist of Germany during the later nineteenth century, and as
itself one of the main contributions to a division of our subject which
comes direct from one of the main fountainheads, the _Poetics_ of
Aristotle. Freytag, however,—and the explicitness of his title bars any
complaint on the subject,—occupies himself almost wholly with the
_theatrical_ side of the matter—such questions as that of verse or prose
and the like being relegated to the close, and very briefly handled. Had
he written three hundred years earlier we should have had more room for
him. As it is, the chief thing noticeable, and that not favourably, is
his adoption of that Goethean utilitarianism which we have stigmatised
before. He says nothing, he tells us, about French classical drama or
the drama of Spain, because “we have nothing more to learn and nothing
to fear from them.” That, it need scarcely be said, is complete heresy
according to the view of criticism maintained in this book. What you
have to “fear” hardly in any case matters; and you have always something
to learn.

[Sidenote: _Hillebrand and cosmopolitan Criticism._]

Karl, or, as he sometimes called himself, Carl, Hillebrand is an
interesting figure, and withal a typical one. He invented, I think, a
useful word—“xenomania” or _Fremdensucht_—which was very proper for the
nineteenth century: he attracted the notice, in his own country, of such
a formidable and considerable person as the young Nietzsche; he wrote in
several languages and lived in more countries, especially England and
Italy. There was a time, which I can remember very well, when he “seemed
to be a pillar.” But I am not so sure that he was one. He prided himself
on his cosmopolitanism: and one of his best-known pieces, addressed to
the editor of _The Nineteenth Century_ and reprinted in the great
collection of his miscellaneous works, entitled _Zeiten Völker und
Menschen_,[1066] deals with the presence of _Fremdensucht_ and
insularity combined in Englishmen. We were, thought Herr Hillebrand some
twenty or five-and-twenty years since, interesting ourselves in
Continental matters at last, but we were not doing it in the right way.
Frenchmen thought we interested ourselves too promiscuously in their men
and matters; so did Germans. We put [_did_ we?] Mérimée and Octave
Feuillet on a level; Rachel and Madame Sarah Bernhardt. We distressed
Herr Hillebrand’s cosmopolitanism and his particularism equally.

This is a sufficiently interesting and distinct point of view to have a
few words here, especially as it has been often taken since. I venture
to disagree with it _in toto_. It is very well, if your sight is weak,
to have the best spectacles adjusted to it that art can adjust. But you
will very seldom better your sight by taking somebody else’s spectacles;
and if you borrow the spectacles of several other people and combine or
frequently substitute them, you will very soon see “men as trees
walking.” To the process of having spectacles made for yourself
corresponds that of studying foreign literatures as widely as possible
and as carefully as possible; the process of adopting French points of
view of Frenchmen, German of Germans, and the like, answers, I think, to
the other. There is a wrong interpretation of _Sportam nactus es_, but
also a right. And I think Herr Hillebrand’s own results bear out what I
have said. His critical work is very extensive; it had much, and still
has some, interest. It is the work of a man of certainly more than
average cleverness and of much more than average information; of a man
with a really fair knowledge of literature and more than a fair
knowledge of institutions, customs, national _mores_ generally. Herr
Hillebrand would never have made some, or many, of the little slips at
which we laugh so much in other people, and at which other people laugh
in us. But his cosmopolitanism, I think, eviscerated and emasculated his
genius. In re-reading essays of his which I have read before, I have
found them faded, tame, “fushionless”; in reading others for the first
time they produce the same effect without the contrast. The satirist was
justified in making fun of the “temptations To belong to other nations”;
but, in a sense of which Mr Gilbert was not thinking, and of which I
doubt his making fun, it _is_ to credit and to advantage that an
Englishman shall remain an Englishman, a German a German, and so forth.
There is a moral in the story of Antæus.

Not that there is not in Hillebrand work still interesting (though it is
usually rather too contemporary as well as too cosmopolitan) when he is
dealing with Fielding and Sterne and Milton, and Machiavelli and
Rabelais and Tasso, as well as when he is dealing with Doudan and Renan
and Taine. He was for an age: but for rather a short one. And one of his
papers is an awful example. It is entitled _Delirium Tremens_, and it
characterises the work with which it deals as a “distressing
aberration.” That work is analysed with considerable skill, and the
article contains some shrewd remarks, notably one on the invariable
tendency towards “charcoal-burner” faith of some kind even in the most
free-thinking Frenchman. Hillebrand’s strength lay in things of this
kind. But the instance shows where his strength did not lie, and that
this was in the direction of literary criticism. For this “distressing
aberration,” this effect of _delirium tremens_, is one of the capital
imaginative works of the later nineteenth century—the _Tentation de
Saint-Antoine_ of Gustave Flaubert.

[Sidenote: _Nietzsche._]

Nietzsche’s criticism[1067] is, on the one hand, very much what might be
expected by any one who might have managed (it would be difficult) to
read only that part of his work which does not contain it, and on the
other throws a very useful amount of additional light on his general
mental attitude. Himself a remarkable artist from the purely literary
side—the best modern German prose-writer by far, with Heine and
Schopenhauer—he cannot help paying literary art the same compliment
which he pays to some other things, that, not exactly of believing and
trembling, but of acknowledging as he blasphemes. He blasphemes, of
course, pretty freely: take away blasphemy, parody, and that particular
kind of borrowing which thinks to disguise itself by inserting or
extracting “nots,” and there is not much of Nietzsche left but form.
[Sidenote: Zarathustra, _the_ Birth of Tragedy, _and_ Der Fall Wagner.]
The mere headings of _Also Sprach Zarathustra_ will guide the laziest to
his ultimate opinions upon poetry and other things. At the beginning,
the _Birth of Tragedy_ (1871) is, despite its title, hardly literary at
all; its theory of an orgiastic hyperanthropic Dionysus-cult superseding
the calm “Apollonian” Epic, and itself superseded by the corrupting
philosophy of Socrates, being entirely philosophic (or philo_moric_).
Later, the onslaught on Wagner is very literary, and consists, in fact,
of a violent—of a frantic—protest against the tendencies of Romanticism,
of which he quite correctly sees that Wagner is, with whatever
differences, a musical exponent, and against “literary” music itself.
Perhaps there never was a hostile contention which the other side could
accept with such alacrity as Nietzsche’s approximation[1068]of Wagner
and Victor Hugo. They _are_ extremely alike in merits as in faults, and
the recognition of the twinship is a point in favour of Nietzsche’s
critical power, whatever his dislike of it may be.

[Sidenote: Unzeitgemässe Betrachtungen.]

To attend more heedfully to chronological order—the four remarkable
essays of the _Unzeitgemässe Betrachtungen_, which, early as they are
(1873-76), are perhaps the last things in which Nietzsche displayed
himself as entirely _compos mentis_, are close to our subject
throughout,[1069] and not seldom openly deal with it. The tremendous
castigation administered to the “Culture-Philistinism” of Strauss—a
document very fit to be registered as an abiding corrective to the hymns
of our German-praisers, from Mr. Arnold to Mr. Haldane, and all who
shall follow—is sometimes directly, and always in spirit,
literary-critical. The unfriendly attitude of the next paper to the
Study of History may seem less so, for, as we have seen, literary
criticism without literary history is almost hopeless. But here
Nietzsche’s as yet unformulated, but certainly conceived, aspirations
towards a future that was to be quite different from the past, probably
come in, and he was entitled to regard with suspicion, and to meet with
protest, the “dry-as-dust” character of German history-study. The
enthusiastic encomia on Schopenhauer and Wagner are again as constantly
literary in character as the subsequent denials of both.

[Sidenote: La Gaya Scienza.]

If the similarity of title in Nietzsche’s _La Gaya Scienza_ (“Die
Fröhliche Wissenschaft”) and in Mr Dallas’s above-mentioned book should
awake expectations of criticism in anybody, he will be at first
grievously disappointed, for, except an anticipation of a later fling at
Seneca,[1070] he will, for a long time, find nothing at all of the kind.
But he will make a very great mistake if he throws the book aside. The
aphoristic manner, or rather the manner of detached notes, like Ben
Jonson’s in the _Discoveries_, which Nietzsche had now adopted, makes it
unsafe to conclude from any one page, or even from a considerable
sequence of pages, what will meet us when we turn the next. In the
middle, and again towards the end, we come upon “pockets” of our ore.
From § 82 onwards, on the opposition of _esprit_ to the Greek temper, on
translation, on the origin of Poetry, we find many noteworthy things,
leading up to a formal note on “Prose and Poetry,” wherein is the
selection of Leopardi, Mérimée, Emerson, and Landor as the prose masters
of the nineteenth century proper. Here Mérimée’s scorn and Landor’s
pride may have had something to do with Nietzsche’s admiration: but they
cannot be said to usurp their places. I am not Italian scholar enough to
give an opinion on Leopardi’s claim. Emerson, some may think, while not
denying his merits, “a little over-parted.” I should venture to
substitute Schopenhauer, if not Nietzsche himself.[1071] And after this
we at last come on the long missing passage on Shakespeare, only to
find, as perhaps some may have been very well prepared to find, that
Shakespeare is not treated as a poet at all, but as the author of
_Hamlet_ and the creator of—Brutus! Nietzsche, as most people should
know, had a great idea of the Romans, thought them _vornehm_, and the
nearest approaches in history to the _Uebermensch_; but his special
selection of Brutus is very curious, though fortunately out of our
range. The other pocket of the book comes long afterwards, and quite
toward the end, where we get interesting things on modern German
philosophers, “learned books and literature,” and the all-important
question, “Was ist Romantik?” Here, however, Nietzsche goes off on
Apollo and Dionysus as of old.

[Sidenote: Jenseits von Gut und Böse, _&c._]

The late and already somewhat half-sane _Jenseits von Gut und Böse_,
with its still later and still more fatally symptomatic continuation the
_Genealogie der Moral_ (1887), devotes itself mainly to non-literary
exercises of Nietzsche’s general topsyturvyfication.[1072] But there are
passages which at any rate come close to literature. Such are the
curious remarks on Galiani, Aristophanes, Petronius, together with some
on Plato and Lessing, in §§ 26-28 of _Jenseits_; those on certain
Germans of the great age, from Goethe himself downwards, in § 247; very
specially those on German style and speech, in § 250; and the quaint
attack on English philosophy in § 255. It may be not improperly observed
here, in connection with Nietzsche’s Anglophobia, that besides what was,
as in the case of “der Alte Zauberer” (Wagner), a sufficient cause of
hate, the fact that he had once been rather directed by and indebted to
English thinkers,[1073] there were others. He paid us the compliment of
believing England to be the European stronghold of Christianity and
Morality, and seems to have known very little directly about us.

[Sidenote: Götzen-Dämmerung.]

The great critical “place” in Nietzsche, however, as far as I have read
him (for I have not yet had time to explore the “rubbish-heaps raked
together by abject adorers,” as a very competent authority once
described them to me, of the _Nachgelassene Werke_) is the
_Götzen-Dämmerung_ (1889), his last publication before the prison-house
closed. Nowhere is the Ishmaelite character, which reveals itself
pathetically in the _Zarathustra_, so petulantly present. The very first
paragraph batches together as “Meine Unmöglichen,” with a scornful tag
to each tail, Seneca, Rousseau, Schiller, Dante, Kant, Hugo, Liszt,
George Sand, Michelet, Carlyle, Mill, the Goncourts, and Zola—a somewhat
heterogeneous company who receive some recruits in the amplifications of
their judgments that follow. A hasty judge, who could not apply the
system of ruthless toleration which has been applied in this book, might
of course disable Nietzsche altogether on some of them. To say that
Dante is “a hyena who makes poetry in graves” is, _mutatis mutandis_, no
more and no less critical than to say that Nietzsche is a Bedlamite who
sets his Bedlam on fire and sings and dances on the blazing walls. Here
the source of uncritical blindness is obvious: and the explanation is
renewed in the cases of Mill, George Sand, and one of the later
additions, Renan. But the objection to Mill’s “_offensive_
clearness,”[1074] to George Sand as “the milch-cow of beautiful style,”
to Renan’s “nerve-dissolvingness,”[1075] are really literary objections,
and, as some may think, not unjust ones.

Very interesting is his intense hatred of Sainte-Beuve for his
“femininity,” his Romanticism (which Nietzsche does not, like some
people, mistake), and (as he lets us see, with his usual naïveté) his
critical power. His wrath with George Eliot for trying to retain
Christian morality, after giving up Christian faith, is less literary.
But, on the whole, Nietzsche’s criticism, such as it is, hangs very well
together and is characteristic enough, even where it may seem,
inconsistent. It has the special bents of the lover of _Rausch_, of the
anti-crusader to whom, not as in the case of his much-admired
Beyle,[1076] the Christian Hell, but the Christian Heaven, is something
that leaves him no peace or patience, with the general drift which we
have seen in German criticism, to fix on extra-literary points. A whole
study might be made of his attitude to Goethe, whom he welcomes,
salutes, almost adores as a fellow anti-crusader, as an example of
_vornehm_ selfishness and unsentiment, while he is never tired of
bringing in some of Goethe’s greatest things, notably the ends of both
parts of _Faust_, for his favourite end-of-the-nineteenth-century trick
of parody-reversal.

[Sidenote: _His general critical position._]

On the whole, therefore, we may call Nietzsche a contributor of
extraordinarily interesting things to our history, and in some ways a
literary critic _in potentia_, such as Germany has hardly given us save
in the case of Novalis. But here, as elsewhere, his gifts of potency
were marred by the _impotency_, the reckless, uncontrolled,
uncontrollable flux and reflux of mood and temper, which distinguished
him ever more and more. We have not required—we have seen that it is
ridiculous to require—a rigid consistency, a development only in one
straight line, from the critic. He may, he must, learn, branch out, even
sometimes retrace his steps in a moderate degree. But when we find, with
but a few years between the judgments, of Schopenhauer, that he is “a
great educator,” a sort of intellectual Joshua to the German Israel, and
that he is a “common smasher or debaser of the currency”;[1077] of
Wagner that he is a hierophant, a master of masters, the “Alexander
Magnus” of music, and that he is an “old sorcerer,” a “modern
Cagliostro,” a “seducer and poisoner of Art,” we can but shake our
heads. No man can go through such revolutions as these and remain a
critic, if he ever was one. That in some ways Criticism has seen no
nobler mind, no stronger or keener faculty, overthrown and lost to her,
is, I think, true enough: but of the overthrow and the loss I can
entertain no doubt.




                               CHAPTER V.

                      REVIVALS AND COMMENCEMENTS.

LIMITATIONS OF THIS CHAPTER—SPAIN—ITALY—DE SANCTIS—CHARACTER OF HIS
    WORK—SWITZERLAND—VINET—SAINTE-BEUVE ON HIM—HIS CRITICISM OF
    CHATEAUBRIAND AND HUGO—HIS GENERAL QUALITY—AMIEL: GREAT INTEREST OF
    HIS CRITICAL IMPRESSIONS—EXAMPLES THEREOF—THE PITY OF IT.


[Sidenote: _Limitations of this chapter._]

Something apologetic has to be said, also, in regard to this present
chapter. It is confessedly inadequate as a History, in each individual
case, of the critical performances of European countries, other than
England, France, and Germany; it is perhaps not so inadequate as a
constituent of the present work. That the writer does not pretend to any
such acquaintance with these performances as he may, he believes, claim
with the others, may seem a rather damning plea: yet perhaps it is not
so. For it is for the other side to show that such acquaintance was
necessarily incumbent on him, and that, not possessing it, he was bound
to postpone the setting forth of what he had to say until the
acquisition was accomplished. I acknowledge that I am not of this
opinion. In some cases, as we shall see, the critical achievements now
under consideration are almost demonstrably unimportant to the general
history of Criticism as yet: and in all it may, I think, be fairly
contended that they are for the present negligible. For the present, no
doubt, only. There probably will come a time when such a new-comer as
Russian will extend to European criticism the influence which it has
already begun to exercise on European literature, and when older
literatures, like Spanish, Italian, Dutch, and the Scandinavian
varieties, will reassert, or assert for the first time, their position.
But they have hardly done so yet, save in the case of those who, like Dr
Brandes, are not of our competence, as living.

[Sidenote: _Spain._]

The most remarkable of the confessions of this with which I am
acquainted is given by the part relating to our present subject, of that
work, so freely used, and so necessarily praised, in the last volume,
the _Historia de las ideas estéticas en España_ of Señor Menéndez y
Pelayo. This consists of three substantial volumes, or about a third of
the whole work. Yet it is hardly too much to say that it is solely
concerned with æsthetic ideas _out of_ Spain—that it is an account of
the general course of European, not of the particular course of Spanish,
criticism. The foreigner and the general historian can hardly be blamed
for not attempting what the native and the specialist declines. If,
indeed, we were concerned with living writers, Señor Menéndez himself
and others would give us most satisfactory occupation: but we are not.

[Sidenote: _Italy._]

The case of Italy is rather different. Here also there are notable
critical names with which our scheme precludes us from dealing, but here
native enterprise has not “confessed and avoided.” I do not know
anything, in any other language, like the very remarkable _Antologia
della Nostra Critica Moderna_ of Signor Luigi Morandi:[1078] and I
certainly do not know of any such testimony to the existing critical
interests of another country as the fact that sixteen editions of it
appear to have been sold in little more than as many years. Yet this
very book justifies our refusal. Signor Morandi has not hesitated to
“throw back,” not merely to Manzoni, who was born fifteen years within
the eighteenth century, but even to Baretti, whose whole life was
comprised therein, and who was born in the year in which Addison died.
Yet by far the larger number of his contributors are living. They have
already done much to make good the claim of their country, if not to
that pride of critical place which she held in the sixteenth century, at
any rate to a place far higher than she could claim in the seventeenth
and eighteenth: and they are likely to go farther yet. For Italy, never
quite neglectful of the glories of her older literature, has of late
turned to their study with a will; and in this turning, as we have seen,
lies the one and certain way to a critical Renaissance.[1079]

[Sidenote: _De Sanctis._]

We must, however, give some special mention to one writer who is very
remarkable in himself, and who is generally admitted to have been, as
far as in one man lay, the author, or at least encourager, and guide of
this renewed attention to criticism in Italy. Francesco de Sanctis is
undoubtedly a very interesting person. To us his interest does not lie—
to the same extent as it may to others—in the coincidence of his time
and his efforts with the new struggle for, and attainment of, political
unity: but we can cheerfully allow a place for this. Italy wanted to do
for and by herself, in criticism as elsewhere, and he came to show her
how so to do. But from our point of view his critical character is
interesting somewhat differently, and somewhat differently explicable.
He obviously, like Mr Arnold in England, like others elsewhere, was
determined towards criticism by the influence of the French Romantics,
especially Sainte-Beuve. But he blended with the general characteristics
of this criticism not so much Mr Arnold’s specially literary devotion to
the greater gods of ancient and modern times, not so much Sainte-Beuve’s
own irresistible attraction to the character, the manners, and so forth
of his subjects—as the old Italian addiction, already revived and
redirected by Vico, towards philosophising. [Sidenote: _Character of his
work._] In the first Essay of his most famous, influential, and
characteristic book[1080] he cannot write more than a few lines without
flinging his disciple neck and heels into the ocean with the question,
as a chief one of Literature, “What is the destiny of the human
generations?” A momentous question certainly: but one which concerns
literature only as it concerns everything else from theology to
therapeutics, and perhaps a little less than it concerns most of them.
But this opens the old truceless war, and we must turn away from it. Let
me only suggest that De Sanctis is a little unfair to the ancients when
he says in the same essay that “the sense of Life begins to reveal
itself in Shakespeare.” Many a dialogue and many a chorus, many an
oration and many a historic passage, will rise up in judgment against
him for this, at the great day of critical account.

We must not, however, be too severe on him; for a certain southern
tendency to hyperbole is not one of his least engaging characteristics.
He shows himself of the nineteenth-century in general, and of the tribe
of Sainte-Beuve in particular, by being almost nothing if not an
essayist. They complain of his _History of Italian Literature_ that,
good as it is, it is too much of a bundle of Essays; his two best-known
works, _Saggi Critici_[1081] and _Nuovi Saggi_,[1082] do not pretend to
be anything else. The latter is chiefly devoted to Italian subjects, for
De Sanctis was deeply imbued with a generous cult of his own noble
literature, which is one of the best features of the Italians. The
_Saggi Critici_ is more miscellaneous, and so more representative. I do
not know his work quite exhaustively enough to be certain how much he
knew of English; but it is rather noteworthy that in dealing with
Beatrice Cenci his reference to Shelley is exceedingly slight, and might
almost be called perfunctory. On the other hand, he has an interesting
(first hand?) comparison between “Machbet” and Wallenstein. But French
literature, and especially contemporary French literature, seems to have
interested him most. He has a very vigorous and successful defence of
Hugo’s Triboulet against Saint-Marc Girardin, and what seems to me the
best, and the most characteristic, of all his essays is one on the
_Contemplations_, where two distinct and rather opposite currents of
thought and sentiment clash and ripple in the most refreshing manner.
Nowhere is there a better example of that generous hyperbolical rhetoric
which has been glanced at: no one has given a more amiable exhibition of
that _petite fièvre cérébrale_ which has been noticed more than once,
and which the great Frenchman excites in all fit minds. But while the
critical De Sanctis applauds and revels, the philosophical De Sanctis
has qualms. Is not (here we have an echo of Planche) Hugo’s art more
musical than poetical? Poetry must have “a clear silver” sound. No sound
can give you any idea: where we have Mr John Morley’s sad heresy about
the “vernal wood” anticipated. So once more the _besoin de philosopher_
did a little spoil De Sanctis, and has continued, let us say, not quite
to improve his countrymen and disciples. But he did a great, an
effectual, and to this day an enduring and admirable work: and even
Italy, high as is the standard which she has set her children, is
justified also of this her child.

[Sidenote: _Switzerland._]

The accounts which I could give of nineteenth-century criticism in most
other nations would be second-hand, would have to be meagre, and, for
the reasons just given, as well as others to be added at the end of this
chapter, would be almost superfluous; but there is one—the smallest of
all—which cannot be quite passed by. Switzerland, from geographical
situation and linguistic and racial circumstance, has always been
exposed to whatever literary influences were felt in each and all of her
three great neighbours: and her contributions to the literature of
Europe, stimulated thereby, have always been more than respectable. We
have somewhat unceremoniously classed not a few of the authors of these
contributions according to language rather than to strict nationality.
But the literary activity of the Swiss—chiefly in French, but _as_
Swiss—has been particularly great and particularly critical during the
nineteenth century: and we may give some space to two[1083] famous
examples of it, one in the earlier, one in the later, division of the
period—to Vinet and to Amiel.

[Sidenote: _Vinet._]

Alexandra Vinet was not a long-lived man, scarcely completing his
half-century. But from a very early age he was a teacher of literature,
and though he devoted part of his energies to theology and other
subjects, he was always, in a manner, a critic in his heart. His
_Chrestomathie Française_,[1084] arranged when he was little past
thirty, was one of the earliest books of the kind, and is still one of
the best, as far as its time would let it be: and his _History of
Eighteenth Century French Literature_[1085] is, and will remain, a minor
Classic. But perhaps no book of his affords better occasion for
criticising his criticism than the posthumous collection of his _Études
sur la Littérature Française au Xix^{ème} Siècle_.[1086]

[Sidenote: _Sainte-Beuve on him._]

Vinet was (to give a choice of metaphors) dubbed Knight-Critic, or
admitted of the Academy of Universal Criticism, at the hands of
Sainte-Beuve himself—the Grandmaster of Order and Academy alike—in an
article written in 1837, and at present contained in the first thirty
pages or so of the _Portraits Contemporains_, vol. iii. It is written in
a more patronising tone, with more meticulousness of detail, and with
less easy mastery of method, than it would have been as a _Causerie_, a
dozen or two dozen years later; but it is very flattering on the whole,
and well enough deserved. The Master’s sword, however, as usual, in the
process of dubbing, finds out, lightly but unerringly, the joints of the
neophyte’s harness. “Les idées morales, religieuses, chrétiennes, eurent
toujours le pas dans son esprit sur les opinions purement littéraires.”
This is the same peculiarity which, with a difference, afterwards
distinguished Vinet’s compatriot, M. Scherer: and it is very noticeable
in the book which we have selected for comment. [Sidenote: _His
criticism of Chateaubriand and Hugo._] The gown and bands of the
Protestant pastor are perpetually hampering the critic’s step and
gesture, and flopping up into his eyes. He admires Chateaubriand,[1087]
but he is constantly stopping to tell him how sad it is that he should
confuse Popish superstition with Christian verity. He admires Victor
Hugo[1088]—he does him indeed much more justice than one might have
expected, and than remarks on Vinet himself would sometimes lead the
second-hand reader to think. But he is made unhappy as a man by Hugo’s
art-for-art’s-sake attitude, by his early royalism, by his later
anti-Christianity or non-Christianity: while as a professor he is
shocked by single-syllable lines, by audacious metaphors (yet he himself
finely says somewhere that “only one poet has a greater range of
metaphor than Hugo, and that is Humanity itself”), by some real
enormities and more escapades of bravado. One is sometimes tempted to
laugh at such things as his review of _Les Burgraves_,[1089] with its
tone of half-puzzled seriousness, till one comes again to such excellent
points as the remark that “Hugo is sometimes mistakable for a parody of
Hugo.”

[Sidenote: _His general quality._]

On the whole, however, I confess that I find Vinet rather estimable than
enjoyable. He is distinctly _lourd_: though it would be unjust and
inaccurate to call him by the dictionary equivalent of that term in
English. He carries his Chair too much with him,[1090] and seems to
think it necessary to set it down with an effort, and formally establish
himself in it, before he makes any deliverance. I do not—I think I may
at this eleventh hour ask my readers if I have not justified this claim
to impartiality—object to him because he is what he calls a spiritualist
in art, or because, against my own views, he pronounces[1091] that there
can be no such thing as “pure” literature. I could produce from him a
very large number of acute and true critical _aperçus_, like those above
cited. He is never merely trivial or negligible: I do not think that he
was in the least indifferent about literature. But he seems to me to
leave his reader indifferent. His critical method has none of that
_maestria_ which carries one away, and only sets one down again when it
chooses to relax its grip. There is no stimulus in Vinet, such as we
find after widely different fashions in Sainte-Beuve himself and in
Planche, in Saint-Victor and in Taine—nay, even in M. Scherer. There is
neither persuasion nor provocation in him: he disposes you neither to
follow nor to fight.

[Sidenote: _Amiel: great interest of his critical impressions._]

Of the famous and much-discussed work of Henri François Amiel,[1092] we
are fortunately concerned only with the literary criticism, the value of
which Mr Arnold duly saw, though, in deference to other persons,
perhaps, he did not pay so much attention thereto as to some other
matters. This literary criticism is of great interest, and I may as well
say at once that I think M. Scherer did not do it justice[1093] when he
said of his friend that “en littérature, il reculait devant une œuvre.”
He could not here mean, what is true, that Amiel’s timid and
half-despairing nature recoiled before the completion of a work, for he
makes it a parallel with his recoiling before avowal in love, and quotes
his own words about his difficulty in “enjoying naïvely and simply.”
Undoubtedly this “moral eunuchism” (for it is impossible not to think of
the famous passage in _Peter Bell the Third_) is to be laid to Amiel’s
charge too often; but I think conspicuously _not_ in his presentments
and judgments of literature. He is here far more healthy and far more
natural than anywhere else. Indeed, he is sometimes so very little
sicklied over with any pale cast that he frankly and naïvely records his
changes of impression about the same book as he reads. These changes
are, in tolerably active and sensitive natures, so rapid and curious
that some practised reviewers have made it a principle, whenever they
can, first to read the book they are reviewing through, with as little
interruption as possible, lest the “plate” shift or change; and,
secondly, never to review it on the same day on which they read it, that
the impressions may have time to blend and harmonise. The most
interesting, perhaps, of Amiel’s records of experience in this kind is
the group of impressions of Eugénie de Guérin, which occur together in
the _Journal_ at vol. i. p. 197. He reads and re-reads her on successive
September days in 1864, and reads her once more in the middle of
October. The first impression (which maintains itself for the two days)
is altogether one of enthusiasm, not merely in regard to the sentimental
side, the _impression nostalgique_, &c., but with a delighted
recognition of _verve_, _élan_, greatness of soul in this “Sévigné des
Champs” [Notre Dame des Rochers will forgive!]. After the month’s
interval he does not recant: but finds a rather less charming side as
well. Eugénie’s existence is at once “too empty and too confined”: he
wants “more air and space.” Now both these impressions are genuine and
vivid: and, what is more, they are both frankly taken and expressed,
without any gaucherie or “feeling faint,” any “touching the hem of the
shift,” and daring no more.

[Sidenote: _Examples thereof._]

And this character of at least relative vivacity—of ease and power in
enjoyment—generally distinguishes, as it seems to me, the literary
entries, which have far less of what some have called the _ton
amielleux_ about them than any others. The description of the style of
Montesquieu[1094] is quite admirably true and fresh: and if that of
Joubert[1095] is open to more exception, it is precisely because Amiel
is mixing up Joubert’s utterances as a literary critic and his
utterances as a philosopher, &c., too much; because he is not keeping
his own saner organ of judgment mainly at work. The fastidious and
morbid side does show itself in that on Rousseau, which follows
immediately: but this we should expect. On Vinet,[1096] though too
complimentary, as was for a dozen reasons almost inevitable, he shows
extraordinary acuteness and _finesse_, as also on Sismondi.[1097] If he
is less satisfactory on Chateaubriand, we can again explain it, and he
does justice to _René_. The apology for Quinet[1098] is as judicious as
it is sympathetic: and I know few more curious and interesting companion
passages in criticism than those on Hugo and Lamartine earlier, on
Corneille and Hugo later, which occur almost together in the book,
though there was some time between the composition of them.[1099]

In the first of these, the juxtaposition of the citations from _Les
Châtiments_ and _Jocelyn_ is a stroke of genius; in the latter batch,
though it is quite clear that the judge does not completely like either
the author of _Polyeucte_ or the author of _Les Misérables_, the
indication of characteristics is even greater in another way, because
more elaborated and responsible. On M. Cherbuliez[1100] Amiel is again
of the first interest, because the slight over-valuation of
compatriotism on the small scale is balanced by a distinct antagonism of
“nervous impression.” And we have even a more curious “place” in the
notice of _John Halifax_,[1101] which is the last of our passages in the
first volume. Here Amiel’s starting-point is a vain imagination—the
usual misjudgment of things English, by a man who does not know England—
but the use made of it is singularly good. The second volume gives us
another invaluable pair on the most antecedently _not_ to be paired of
writers, About and Lotze—who nevertheless bring out between them the
remarkable powers of Amiel’s mind-camera. The summer of 1869 supplies
more documents on Lamennais, Heine (inadequate this latter, but again
necessarily), and Renan, with admirable obituary remarks to follow on
Sainte-Beuve. One side of Taine—the side up to the date almost solely in
evidence—comes out two years afterwards,[1102] and the remaining
references that I have are so numerous that I fear they, or rather some
of them only, must be collected in a note.[1103]

[Sidenote: _The pity of it._]

We must, however, in order to take an accurate and complete view of
Amiel as a critic, and not merely of Amiel’s occasional criticisms,
remember that these _aperçus_, brilliant as they are, are scattered over
more than thirty years, and that they form, as it were, the lucid
intervals in a lifelong night of moping, the islets far scattered and
estranged from another, amid the _nigras undas lethargi_. That the man
who wrote them was, at the time of writing, almost invariably a sane,
mentally active, “moderately cheerful” being, is, I think, absolutely
beyond question; that he might, if he had chosen to write more and to
give himself more freely to that which comes before the writing, have
freed himself to a great extent from his Melancholia, I have no doubt.
Escape from that dread yet sweet enchantress—that serpent not of old
Nile but of the older Ocean that flows round the world—no man can wholly
who has been born of her servants; probably no such man would ever wish
to do so. But there are two gates of partial and temporary emancipation—
the Gate of Humour and the Gate of Study—which she usually permits to
stand open, and through which men may pass, lest her sway become
tyranny. That of Humour was apparently barred to Amiel: the other
evidently was not. But he would very rarely use it. We know that he had
many opportunities of contributing to critical journals, and that he
would not take them, but fled back to Maya and the Great Wheel. Here the
other, the more popular, the more irritating, side of him comes in.

But I can see no _pose_ whatever in the literary entries. On the
contrary, their freshness and spontaneity make a very remarkable
contrast to almost all the rest of the book, except perhaps a few of the
Nature-passages. Still, they _are_ “intervals and islets” only—there is
a singular want of connection between them. Amiel seems seldom or never
to have troubled himself in the least about taking any connected views
of literature: he seldom or never extends the remarkable comparative
power which he shows in his various companion sketches. And, further, I
am not certain that if he had attempted regular studies or _causeries_
they would have been good—that he would not have maundered off into the
vague instead of giving grasped views and judgments. This, however, no
one can decide. What remains positive and proved is, first, that his
intellect never shows to greater advantage than in his literary
passages.

_Sed hæc hactenus._ I believe honestly, and not as a subterfuge to cover
pusillanimity or laziness, that if I were to give here an examination of
notable critics during the nineteenth century from every nation and
country in Europe, I should not really advance the survey of criticism
which we now possess in the very least. Until a time so recent that it
falls out of our consideration, all these countries and nations have
most certainly been following—until, perhaps, one which is not recent
but still to come, they seem likely to follow, the same course which the
Three First have pursued before them, and in most, if not in all cases,
have followed their leaders in a more definite order of sequence still.
All, about the second or third decade of the century, devoured Scott and
Byron; all, a little (or more than a little) later, reinforced our
influence by that of the French Romantic movement; most, earlier or
later, devoted themselves to that German literature which had in a sense
preceded ours, as it certainly had the French. In all, the Romantic
leaven worked itself out, under the conditions of the literature and the
individual, to spirit, or wine, or vinegar, as the case might be. In
all, “Realism” and “Naturalism,” “Decadence” and “Preciousness,” showed
themselves, as similar things have shown themselves many a time before,
in the merry-go-round of history and of literature. Quite lately, in
some—Russian, Norwegian, Belgian, _que-sais-je?_—signs of secondary
fermentation have been shown, which have greatly impressed some
observers. But it is as yet much too early to take serious critical
account of them.

And so the long journey—the tale of length also, which recounts it—may,
if it actually must not, end with a few general observations of summary
and reflection, to correspond to those which we have interspersed
before.

                               CONCLUSION

                              CONCLUSION.


§  I. THE PRESENT STATE OF CRITICISM.

§ II. THE CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE MATTER.


                                   I.

In a letter (written on what was to prove his deathbed) which I received
from my friend of nearly forty years, the late Bishop of London, in
reference to the first volume of this work, he said he had often wished
it possible to begin books of the kind at the end, and write backward,
so as at once to engage the interest of the reader on matter more or
less known to him, and to lead him on to the unknown by easy stages,
instead of plunging him into a bath of strange matter. I nearly always
found in Creighton’s utterances—from the time when we used to outwatch
the Bear in certain lofty rooms looking over Merton Meadow, and the
Broad Walk, and the river, towards the full of the moon—a _Hinterland_
as well as a foreground of meaning. And in this case, no doubt, the
advantage of such a topsyturvyfication, if it were practicable, would
not be confined to the reader. It is almost as important to the writer
that he should not lose himself too much in “origins”—that he should
keep fruit as well as root in view—nay, that, if possible, he should
have a sort of Alcinous' garden of the subject before him, with its
various developments simultaneously present. I hope, indeed, that I have
not quite failed, as it is, to accomplish something of this
tregetour-work for my own benefit and the reader’s. Yet even “beginning
at the end” would have had its dangers, for in no part of the book is
what we have sometimes called a “horizontal” view more necessary, or
more apparently hard to maintain, than in this present. The immense mass
of material which has to be selected or rejected is an obvious
difficulty: and the certainty that, as readers in the earlier part have
grumbled at too extensive treatment of matters of which they knew
nothing, so in this later they will grumble at too curt treatment of
what they do know and expect to be treated fully—is equally obvious. But
these are not really formidable dragons or lions. To grapple with the
first is the plain and _prima facie_ business of the adventure, and to
the second the adventurer must make up his mind.

But the knight’s worst foes now, as of old, are not lions or dragons,
but treacherous and deluding enchanters and enchantresses, taking
advantage of his own weakness. And the difficulty of keeping a steady,
achromatic, comparative estimate of the criticism of to-day and of
yesterday is in this instance Archimago and Duessa at once. We have
seen, again and again, during the progress of our history, how at one
time—a long time ago for the most part—Criticism has been entirely
bewitched by the idea of a Golden Age, when all poets were sacred and
all critics gave just judgment: how, at another, a confidence, bland or
pert as the case might be, has existed (and exists) that we are much
wiser than our fathers. Above all, we have seen repeatedly that constant
and most dangerous delusion that the fashion which has just ceased to be
fashionable is a specially bad and foolish one, with its concomitant and
equally unreasonable but rather less dangerous opposite, that the
fashion that _is_ in is the foolishest and feeblest of all fashions.
With these things we have hitherto had to cope only at long bowls, so
that it has been comparatively easy to keep a critical head. We are now
at closest grapple with them: and while it cannot but be difficult to
escape or to conquer, it will be wellnigh impossible not to seem
captured or vanquished to spectators who have themselves not fully
purged their eyes with the necessary euphrasy and rue.

From these same dangers, however, the very fact of having steadily
worked through the history from the beginning, yet with an abiding
memory of the end, should be something of a safeguard for writer and
reader alike. We have seen how justly Mr Rigmarole might pronounce all
times “pretty much like our own” in respect of the faults and dangers of
criticism, though this time might incline to that danger and that to
this. If one—even one—lesson has emerged, it must have been that to
select the favourite critical fancy of _any_ time as the _unum
necessarium_ is fatal—or redeemed only by the completeness with which
such a selection, when faithfully carried out, demonstrates its own
futility. Yet we have seen also that the criticism of no time is wholly
idle or wholly negligible—that the older periods and the older men are
no “shadows,” but almost more real, because more original, than the
newer—that each and all have lessons, from the times of prim and
strictly limited knowledge to the times of swaggering and nearly
unlimited ignorance. And we should not be quite unable to apply
these.[1104]

In the preceding Book we have surveyed, in most cases virtually and in
some actually, to the end of the Nineteenth century, the latest stage or
stages of that modified and modernised criticism, the rise of which was
traced in the first Book of the present volume, and its victorious
establishment in the second. We have seen how—owing partly, no doubt, to
the mere general law of flux and reflux, but partly, and perhaps mainly,
to the enlarged study of literature, and the breaking down, in
connection with this, of the Neo-classic standards and methods,—judging
_a posteriori_, or, as Johnson, prophesying and protesting, called it,
“by the event,” came to take the place of judging _a priori_, or by the
rule. That in many cases the new critics would not themselves have
admitted this description of their innovations we have not attempted to
deny or disguise: but we have not been able to agree with them. We have,
however, seen also that to satisfy the craving for generalities and for
“pushing ignorance further back,” new preceptist systems, in no small
number, and sometimes of great pretensions and no small complexity, have
been advanced, and that the new subject of “Æsthetics”—in itself little
more than a somewhat disorderly generic name for these systems—has
obtained considerable recognition. But no one of these has, nor have all
of them together, attained anything like that position of
acknowledgment, “establishment,” and authority which was enjoyed by the
Neo-classic faith: and we have seen that some of the straitest
doctrinaires have condescended, while the general herd of critics have
frankly preferred, to judge authors as they found them.

That the results have been in many ways satisfactory, it seems
impossible for any one but the extremest of partisans to deny. The last
and worst fault of any state, political or other, that of “decreeing
injustice by a law,” has been almost entirely removed (at least as a
general reproach) from the state of Criticism. That a work of art is
entitled to be judged on its own merits or demerits, and not according
as its specification does or does not happen to be previously entered
and approved in an official schedule—this surely cannot but seem a gain
to every one not absolutely blinded by prejudice. Nor is it the only
point which ought to unite all reasonable suffrages. By the almost
necessary working of the new system, the _personnel_ of Criticism has
been enlarged, improved, strengthened in a most remarkable degree. The
old opposition of the poet and the critic has ceased to exist. It is
true indeed that, as we have seen, it never existed as an absolute law;
but it was a prevailing one, and it deprived criticism of some of its
most qualified recruits, or made them, if they joined, inconsistent,
like Lope, and Dryden, and Johnson. Nay, Coleridge himself could hardly
have been the critic he was under the older dispensation, much less
those other poets, many and of many countries, who have enriched the
treasury of a Goddess once thought to be the poet’s deadliest foe.

Yet, again, putting the contributions of poets, as poets, on one side,
the general literary harvest of the kind has been undoubtedly more
abundant, and in its choicer growths more varied, more delightful, even
more instructive. A collection of the best critical results of the last
fifty years only would certainly yield in these points to no similar
book that could be compiled from the records of any other period, even
of much greater length. From the perfected craftsmanship of Saint-Beuve,
and the whole critical production of Matthew Arnold, through the work of
writers unnecessary to enumerate, because all possible enumeration would
almost necessarily be an injustice, you might collect—not a volume, not
half a dozen, but a small, and not so very small, library, of which you
could not merely say “Here be truths,” but “Here is reading which any
person of ordinary intelligence and education will find nearly, if not
quite, as delightful as he can find in any other department of _belles
lettres_, except the very highest triumphs of prose and poetic Fiction
itself.”

Now, the removal of the reproach of injustice, the removal of the
reproach of dulness, these are surely good and even great things: while
better, and greater still, is the at least possible institution of a new
Priesthood of Literature, disinterested, teaching the world really to
read, enabling it to understand and enjoy, justifying the God and the
Muse to Men.

This is a fair vision; so fair, perhaps, that it may seem to be, like
others, made of nothing more solid than “golden air.” That would be
perhaps excessive, for, as has been pointed out above, the positive
gains under this New Dispensation, both of good criticism produced and
of good literature freed from arbitrary persecution, have been very
great. But, as we foreshadowed in the Interchapter at the end of the
last volume, there is another side to the account, a side not to be
ignored. If Buddha and Mr Arnold be right, and if “Fixity” be “a sign of
the Law”—then most assuredly Modern Criticism is not merely lawless, but
frankly and wilfully antinomian. It is rare to find two critics of
competence liking just the same things; it is rarer still to find them
liking the same things for the same reason. And so it happens that the
catholic ideal which this New Criticism seemed likely to establish is
just as far off, and just as frequently neglected or even outraged, as
in the old days of strict sectarianism, and without the same excuse. The
eighteenth-century critic could render a reason, _pro tanto_ valid, for
patronising Chaucer, and taking exceptions even to Milton, because
neither was like Dryden. But the critic of to-day who belittles Dryden
because he is not like Chaucer or Milton is utterly without excuse:—and
yet he is to be found, and found in high places. If (as in another case)
critics were to be for a single day what they ought to be, the world
would no doubt be converted; but there certainly does not appear to be
much more chance of this in the one case than in the other.

And so the enemy—who is sometimes a friendly enemy enough—has not the
slightest difficulty in blaspheming,—in asking whether the criterion of
pleasure does not leave the fatal difficulty: “Yes: but pleasure _to
whom_?”; in demanding some test which the simple can apply; in
reproaching “Romantic” critics with faction and will-worship, with
inconsistency and anarchy. Nor perhaps is there any better shift than
the old Pantagruelian one—to _passer oultre_. There _are_ these
objections to the modern way of criticism: and probably they can never
be got rid of or validly gainsaid. But there is something beyond them,
which can be reached in spite of them, and which is worth the reaching.

This something is the comprehensive and catholic possession of
literature—all literature and all that is good in all—which has for the
first time become possible and legitimate. From Aristotle to La Harpe—
even to one of the two Matthew Arnolds—the covenant of criticism was
strictly similar to that of the Jewish Law,—it was a perpetual “Thou
shalt not do this,” or “Thou shalt do this only in such and such a
specified way.” There might be some reason for all the commandments, and
excellent reason for some; but these reasons were never in themselves
immortal, and they constantly tended to constitute a mortal and
mortifying Letter. The mischief of this has been shown in something not
far from two thousand pages, and there is no need to spend more time on
it. Nor is it necessary even to argue that in the region of Art such a
Law entirely lacks the justification which it may have in the region of
Morals.

But it may fairly be asked, How do you propose to define _any_
principles for your New Critic? And the answers are ready, one in
Hellenic, one in Hebraic phraseology. The definition shall be couched as
the man of understanding would define it: and if any will do the works
of the New Criticism he shall know the doctrine thereof. And the works
themselves are not hard to set forth. He must read, and, as far as
possible, read everything—that is the first and great commandment. If he
omits one period of a literature, even one author of some real, if ever
so little, importance in a period, he runs the risk of putting his view
of the rest out of focus; if he fails to take at least some account of
other literatures as well, his state will be nearly as perilous.
Secondly, he must constantly compare books, authors, literatures indeed,
to see in what each differs from each, but never in order to dislike one
because it is not the other. Thirdly, he must, as far as he possibly
can, divest himself of any idea of what a book _ought to be_, until he
has seen what it is. In other words, and to revert to the old simile,
the plate to which he exposes the object cannot be too carefully
prepared and sensitised, so that it may take the exactest possible
reflection: but it cannot also be too carefully protected from even the
minutest line, shadow, dot, that may affect or predetermine the
impression in the very slightest degree.

To carry this out is, of course, difficult; to carry it out in
perfection is, no doubt, impossible. But I believe that it can be done
in some measure, and could be done, if men would take criticism both
seriously and faithfully, better and better—by those, at least, who
start with a certain favourable disposition and talent for the exercise,
and who submit this disposition to a suitable training in ancient and
modern literature. And by such endeavours, some nearer approach to the
“Fair Vision” must surely be probable than was even possible by the
older system of schedule and precept, under which even a new masterpiece
of genius, which somehow or other “forced the consign” and established
itself, became a mischief, because it introduced a new prohibitive and
exclusive pattern. I have said more than once that, according to the
common law of flux and reflux—the Revolution which those may accept who
are profoundly sceptical of Evolution—some return, not to the old
Neo-classicism, but to some more dogmatic and less æsthetic criticism
than we have seen for the last three generations, may be expected, and
that there have been not a few signs of its arrival. But this is a
History, not a Prophecy, and sufficient to the day is the evil thereof.
Perhaps even the good is not quite so insufficient as the day itself,
“chagrined at whatsoe’er _it is_,” may be apt to suppose.

                                  II.

“Who would has heard Sordello’s story told.”

In these three volumes an endeavour has been made to fulfil the pledge
given at their beginning, and to set before the reader, in a plain tale,
what men have actually done, said, and thought in Criticism of
Literature, in Judging of Authors. We have seen how the art grew up,
like so many other arts, as a sort of _parergon_, as a corollary upon
the strictly practical study of Rhetoric for the purpose of the orator:
and how it was long held in a sort of subjection to this _techne_,
which, if not exactly a _techne banausos_, certainly must rank far below
the study and the fruition of the whole of literature. We have seen how,
in the times called ancient, it never got wholly free from this inferior
position; how, in the times called mediæval, it hardly showed any signs
of life; how it revived with the general new birth, and what have been
its fortunes since. There can be no need to pad this already stout
volume with abstracts of our Interchapters. The story of Criticism is
actually before the reader, and if he will not take it now, that it is
at last given to him, because there is wanting something that is not the
story, I cannot help it. No doubt there are some, perhaps there are
many, who honestly and impartially think the story not worth giving,
think it a story of something, at best a superfluity, generally a
failure, at worst a nuisance, redeemable and excusable only (if then) by
being made to serve as illustration of some philosophic theory. But I
have said often enough and positively enough, though I trust not too
contumaciously, that I do not think so.

And even if the record seem too often a record of failure and mistake,
there is a cheerful side to this also. Most of the dangers of criticism,
as this long survey must have sufficiently taught those who care to
learn, are comfortably and reassuringly (if from another point of view
despairingly) old. We know they will come, and we know they will go,
whether in our time or in another we cannot say, but it does not much
matter.

“The Whole man idly boasts to find,” no doubt. Not many have even
attempted to do it; few who have attempted it have succeeded in that
comparatively initial and rudimentary adventure which consists in justly
finding the parts. But Criticism is, after all, an attempt, however
faulty and failing, however wandering and purblind, to do both the one
and the other. No Muse, or handmaid of the Muses (let it be freely
confessed) has been less often justified of her children: none has had
so many good-for-nothings for sons. Of hardly any have some children had
such disgusting, such patent, such intolerable faults. The purblind
theorist who mistakes the passport for the person, and who will not
admit without passport the veriest angel; the acrid pedant who will
allow no one whom he dislikes to write well, and no one at all to write
on any subject that he himself has written on, or would like to write
on, who dwells on dates and commas, who garbles out and foists in, whose
learning may be easily exaggerated but whose taste and judgment cannot
be, because they do not exist;—these are the too often justified
patterns of the critic to many minds. The whole record of critical
result, which we have so laboriously arranged and developed, is a record
of mistake and of misdoing, of half-truths and nearly whole errors.

So say they, and so let them say: things have been said less truly. But,
once more, all this is no more Criticism itself than the crimes and the
faults of men are Humanity in its true and eternal idea. Criticism is
the endeavour to find, to know, to love, to recommend, not only the
best, but all the good, that has been known and thought and written in
the world. If its corruption be specially detestable, its perfection is
only the more amiable and consummate. And the record of the quest, while
it is not quite the record of the quest for other Eldorados—while it has
some gains to yield, some moments of adeption, some instances of those
who did not fail—should surely have some interest even for the general:
it should more surely have much for those few but not unworthy, faint
yet pursuing, who would rather persevere in the search for the
unattainable than rust in acquiescence and defeat.

For to him who has once attained, who has once even comprehended, the
_ethos_ of true criticism, and perhaps to him only, the curse which Mr
Browning has put in one of his noblest and most poetic passages does not
apply. To him the “one fair, good, wise thing” that he has once grasped
remains for ever as he has grasped it—_if_ he has grasped it at first.
Not twenty, not forty years, make any difference. What has been, has
been and remains. If it is not so, if there is palling and blunting,
then it is quite certain either that the object was unworthy or that the
subject did not really, truly, critically embrace it—that he was
following some will-o'-the-wisp of fancy on the one hand, some baffling
wind of doctrine on the other, and was not wholly, in brain and soul,
under the real inspiration of the Muse. That this adeption and fruition
of literature is to a certain extent innate may be true: that it is both
idle and flagitious to simulate it if it does not exist, is true. But it
can certainly be cultivated where it exists, and it probably in all
cases requires cultivation in order that it may be perfect. In any fair
state of development it is its own exceeding great reward,—a possession
of the most precious that man can have. And the practical value of the
Art of Criticism, and of the History of Criticism (which, as in other
cases, is merely the exposition of the art in practice), is that it can
and does assist this development; that by pointing out past errors it
prevents interference with enjoyment; that it shows how to grasp and how
to enjoy; that it helps the ear to listen when the horns of Elfland
blow.

-----

Footnote 1:

  For uniformity’s sake I have kept the title “to the present day.” That
  day, however, was the day of the first volume, 1900; and should the
  book reappear it will read “to the end of the nineteenth century.”

Footnote 2:

  Especially in the phrase “the Modern Spirit”—a _Geist_ who seems to
  have received the blessing of a good opinion of himself, and to have
  no inclination to “deny” it.

Footnote 3:

  As I have known this quotation challenged, I may observe that there is
  a Tenth book of the _Æneid_ as well as a First.

Footnote 4:

  Published, not entirely, by Thyer of Manchester in 1759 (2 vols.). A
  handsome reprint of 1827 gives only a few of the prose “Characters”:
  more of these, but not the whole, were given by Mr H. Morley in his
  _Character-Writing of the Seventeenth Century_ (London, 1891). The
  verse remains may be found in Chalmers or in the Aldine (vol. ii.,
  London, 1893).

Footnote 5:

  A blank rhyme indicates “Howard”—whether Edward or Robert does not
  matter. But another blank requires a trisyllable to fill it.

Footnote 6:

  Benlowes is a warning to “illustrated poets.” It pleased him to have
  his main book (_Theophila, or Love’s Sacrifice_: London, 1652, folio)
  splendidly decorated by Hollar and others; and the consequence is that
  copies of it are very rare, and generally mutilated when found. I
  congratulate myself on having first read Benlowes and William Woty, a
  minor poet of a century later, on the same day. To study _Theophila_
  and _The Blossoms of Helicon_ in succession is quite a critical gaudy.

Footnote 7:

  I do not make Vico my Italian example, for the same reasons which
  induced me to postpone him to this volume. See _inf._, chap. v.

Footnote 8:

  _The_V. sup., ii. 450, 553.

Footnote 9:

  _The_Op. cit. sup., ii. 425 note, p. 71. I am not certain whether this
  came before or after the 1897 reprint (by E. Ritter: Paris and Berne)
  of Muralt. But Dr Otto von Greyerz had some years earlier published a
  study of him (Frauenfeld, 1888), which I have not yet seen.

Footnote 10:

  _The_V. sup., ii. 271.

Footnote 11:

  _The_V. sup., ii. 63.

Footnote 12:

  From the social-historical side he is very valuable. It is a pity, and
  rather a surprise, that Macaulay did not know—for if he had known he
  must have used—him. No foreign writer is more valuable as illustrating
  the astonishing coarseness and the less astonishing immorality which
  the Puritan curse had directly, or by reaction, brought upon England.

Footnote 13:

  For the special subjects of the present chapter, putting Lessing, and
  even him not wholly, out of the question, there exists a remarkably
  “in-going” monograph, Herr Friedrich Braitmaier’s _Geschichte der
  Poetischen Theorie und Kritik von den Diskursen der Maler bis auf
  Lessing_ (Frauenfeld, 1889). This book has been of great use to me;
  and I do not think that any one can read it without respect for the
  author’s learning, his good sense, and the clearness and definiteness
  of his report. His _compte-rendu_ of particular authors is often
  larger than it need be for a fair first view; while neither it nor
  anything else can ever dispense the thorough student from going to
  originals; and he might be here and there less polemical. But these
  things will not displease some readers, and certainly they do not
  spoil the book, which, however, be it observed, is deplorably in want
  of an index. With it should be taken the extremely full and informing
  introduction—almost a book in itself—of Herr Johann von Antoniewicz to
  the ed. of Joh. Elias Schlegel, cited below. For almost all my German
  chapters I am also much indebted to the admirable _Grundriss der
  Geschichte d. Deutsch. Nationallit._ of Koberstein (ed. 5, by Bartsch,
  Leipzig: 5 vols. and index, 1872-73)—a book which, let some say what
  they will, is not likely soon to be really obsolete.

Footnote 14:

  The text-book for German seventeenth-century criticism is that of Dr
  Karl Borinski, _Die Poetik der Renaissance und die Anfänge der
  literarischen Kritik in Deutschland_ (Berlin, 1886). This book is
  “choke-full” of information and indication, and the only possible
  faults that Momus himself could find with it are—first, that the
  author sometimes digresses somewhat from his path, which is itself so
  little trodden that one would like him to stick to it; and, secondly,
  that his dealings with his subject might be rather clearer and more
  methodic in the text, and, being what they are, are all the more in
  want of a clear and methodic table of contents. But I am too much
  indebted to him to quarrel.

Footnote 15:

  _Schönes Blumenfeldt._ Lignitz, 1601, 4to.

Footnote 16:

  ii. 360 note.

Footnote 17:

  G. R. Weckherlin. See Borinski, p. 51. The influence of English
  literature on German was still pretty strong. Sidney’s _Arcadia_ was
  translated in 1629.

Footnote 18:

  Braunschweig, 1651.

Footnote 19:

  Berlin-Jena, 1656.

Footnote 20:

  _Kurzer Wegweiser sur Deutsch-Tichtkunst._ Je[h]na, 1663. Some of
  Buchner’s original work seems to be lost, if it ever was published.

Footnote 21:

  I use the Zürich reprint of 1749.

Footnote 22:

  1702.

Footnote 23:

  A comparison of the three contemporaries, Gravina, Werenfels, and
  Addison, would make an interesting critical essay.

Footnote 24:

  “Some are so rigorous that they will only have a time of one _or two_
  days.” I quote from Borinski, p. 364, not having seen the original.

Footnote 25:

  _V. sup._, ii. 552-557.

Footnote 26:

  _Op. cit._, Part I., Chaps. 1-5 and 8. His special enemy or target is
  Danzel’s _Gottsched und seine Zeit_ (Leipzig, 1848), an unhesitating
  championship of the classical champion.

Footnote 27:

  1725-26. These eccentric and sometimes _baroque_ titles were a mania
  with German men of letters. It had become epidemic in the fifteenth
  century, and continued so till the eighteenth, if not longer, the last
  very distinguished patient being, of course, Jean Paul. In this the
  _feminine_ is an exaggeration of the Addisonian tendency to “fair-sex
  it,” as Swift says.

Footnote 28:

  He _had_ a real zeal for his native tongue: and it is admitted that
  the _Beiträge_, by discarding the Spectatorian miscellaneousness, and
  concentrating attention upon letters, and by promoting, if mainly from
  the mere side of language, the study of elder German literature, did
  much good.

Footnote 29:

  It has been debated whether “Sasper” or “Saspar,” by which names the
  Swiss critics sometimes (but very rarely) mention our poet, is a proof
  of ignorance or merely a phonetic accommodation. But it is admitted
  that the first German who felt his true inspiration and healing power
  was J. E. Schlegel, _v. inf._

Footnote 30:

  I have been remonstrated with, in no unfriendly manner, for not
  discussing the origin, progress, and variations of this famous word. I
  can only say of this, as of some other remonstrances, that all show
  rather imperfect realisation of what I intended to do in this book.
  Such a discussion would form a most fitting part of a volume of
  _Abhandlungen_ or _Excursus_ on this History—a volume which, if I
  found any encouragement to do so, I would very gladly write, and for
  which I have all the materials ready. But it and its possible
  companions would, according to my ideas of my plan, not merely enlarge
  the book itself too much, but throw it out of scheme and scale, if
  they were introduced into the text.

Footnote 31:

  Antonio Conti (1677-1749) is called author of that _Paragone_ which in
  vol. ii. p. 554 _sup._ I called “anonymous,” because Gottsched gave no
  author for it, and which was an offshoot of this correspondence in
  1728-29. Conti was acquainted with Leibnitz and Newton, spent a long
  time both in England and in France, wrote tragedies and other things,
  which are imperfectly collected in his _Prose e Poesie_, Venice, vol.
  i., 1739; vol. ii. (posthumous), 1756. Professors D’Ancona and Bucci
  (_Manuale della Litt. Ital._, Firenze, 1897, iv. 379) speak highly of
  him. The passage which they give from him on Dante and Petrarch is
  respectable and erudite, but gives no very high idea of his critical
  powers. Milton sticks to history and tradition, but Dante does all
  “out of his own head.” Petrarch has in his poetry not only the sacred
  and the venerable, but the graceful and the delicate, &c., &c. For
  more on him and on König see note at end of chapter.

Footnote 32:

  _Kritische Abhandlung von dem Wunderbaren in der Poesie und dessen
  Verbindung mit dem Wahrscheinlichen in einer Vertheidigung des
  Gedichtes Joh. Milton’s von dem Verlorenen Paradiese._ [By Bodmer.]
  1740.

  _Kritische Abhandlung von der Natur, den Absichten und dem Gebrauche
  der Gleichnisse._ [By Breitinger, edited (_besorget_) by Bodmer.]
  1740.

  _Kritische Dichtkunst. Worinnen die Poetische Malerei in Absicht auf
  die Erfindung im Grunde untersuchet wird_, &c. [By Breitinger.] 1740.

  _Kritische Betrachtung uber die Poetischen Gemahlde der Dichter._ [By
  Bodmer, with an introduction by Breitinger.] 1741.

  All these might, with advantage, be more accessible than they are. The
  _Kritische Dichtkunst_ was promised long ago as a reprint in the
  _Litteraturdenkmale_. The originals appear to be rare, and when they
  occur are dear, and at once carried off.

Footnote 33:

  _V. sup._, ii. 554. As an example of Gottsched in his less sad but
  more furious mood, nothing can be better than the passage quoted by
  Herr Braitmaier (_op. cit._, p. 139) from the _Beiträge_ (xxix. 8).
  After much vituperation of Shakespeare (_Julius Cæsar_ had just been
  translated) and other English playwrights, even Addison, he winds up:
  “That the English stage helps in such a shameless fashion to nourish
  the two principal vices of the English people—cruelty and lust—is
  something so horrible that all honour-loving Englishmen must blush as
  often as they think of their theatre. There is scarcely a comedy
  wherein blood and murder do not come in just as if it were a tragedy,
  and wherein both sexes do not openly, and with the most revolting
  expressions, speak of things that can only occur in disreputable and
  forbidden houses.” Poor Gottsched!

Footnote 34:

  Which, be it remembered, B. himself translated.

Footnote 35:

  Heilbronn?, 1883.

Footnote 36:

  These latter date from 1742.

Footnote 37:

  It is well known that Germany was still intensely provincial. The
  “snorings under six-and-thirty monarchs,” as Heine put it unkindly,
  almost a century later, were not peaceful by any means.

Footnote 38:

  Zürich, 1741-44.

Footnote 39:

  They were numerous from 1740 to 1760, and their titles—except those of
  the rather well-known _Bremer Beiträge_, itself a “short title,” and
  the _Gelehrten Zeitungen_ of Göttingen, are mostly rather cumbrous,
  _e.g._, Cramer and Mylius’ _Bemühungen zur Beförderung der Kritik und
  des Guten Geschmacks_, Halle, 1743-47. I do not pretend to a very
  extensive acquaintance with them, but what I have confirms Herr
  Braitmaier’s statement that, excepting the Göttingen one, and this for
  the sake of Haller, chiefly, “All these newspapers did as good as
  nothing for the advancement of criticism.”

Footnote 40:

  Gellert, who was a sort of “prefect” for his time in this school of
  modern German literature, gave at least one proof of practical wisdom
  which few men of letters have equalled. Frederic the Great sent for
  him, poured oil over him from his beard to the skirts of his clothing,
  and invited him again. Gellert did not go. As for the others,
  Christian Mylius, dying young, had the further good luck to be a
  friend of Lessing, who edited his _Vermischte Schriften_ (Berlin,
  1754). They run from Theology to Vivisection. The chief critical piece
  is a tractate (1743), _Von den Reimen und dem Sylbenmasse in
  Schauspielen_. Mylius is against rhyme both in Tragedy and in Comedy.

Footnote 41:

  I say “at least” because the youngest brother of the elder batch,
  Johann Heinrich, also meddled with literature. But we need take no
  keep of him.

Footnote 42:

  A phase of, and sometimes identified with, the general “Swiss-Saxon”
  battle.

Footnote 43:

  I only know the third edition (Leipzig, 1770), which, as well as the
  second, 1758-59, seems to have been a good deal revised. There are
  eleven _Abhandlungen_ here, two of which were new, while two others
  had been added in the second to the original seven.

Footnote 44:

  Ed. cit. _sup._, J. E. S. _Aesthetische und Dramaturgische Schriften_.
  Heilbronn, 1887.

Footnote 45:

  Ed. cit., pp. 96-166.

Footnote 46:

  He is nearest in the _title_ of the first dissertation, “How Imitation
  must sometimes be _unlike_ the originals,” which may have deceived
  some. But he does not quite live up to this, and mainly contents
  himself with arguing that you may _improve upon_ your originals,
  embellish them, &c., to give more pleasure.

Footnote 47:

  _Sämmtliche Werke._ Wien, 1838.

Footnote 48:

  _V. sup._, i. 139.

Footnote 49:

  Ed. cit., p. 958.

Footnote 50:

   This separation of the drama (or at least of the theatre) and
  literature may shock some readers, but I can rely on support from
  persons who take a very different view of the acting theatre, and a
  very different interest in it from mine, yet who agree with me that
  the connection between literature and acted or actable drama is in no
  sense essential or necessary.

Footnote 51:

  _Hamburgische Dramaturgie_, §§ 33-35, vol. xi. p. 233 _sq._ of the
  other edition which I use. There is a translation by Miss Zimmern and
  others of the _Dramaturgie_, the _Laocoön_, and one or two other
  things in Bohn’s Library.

Footnote 52:

  _Œuvres_, ed. Belin (Paris, 1819), ii. 17-28. A translation—the old
  contemporary version revised by the present writer—will be found in
  Marmontel’s _Moral Tales_ (London, 1895).

Footnote 53:

  _V. sup._, ii. 327, 417, 418.

Footnote 54:

  Of course the _general_ drift of the piece, with the corrections it
  introduces in the _ut pictura poesis_ maxim, is very important indeed,
  and was of the very highest opportunity in supplying corrections to
  the different opinions on the subject of Du Bos and the Switzers.
  Moreover, such discussions as that of the Disgusting, &c., are
  undoubtedly things which we should have noticed in the first volume,
  and perhaps in the second. But the iron room is closing in.

Footnote 55:

  _Laocoön_, xx. Ed. cit., x. 120 _sq._

Footnote 56:

  Observe that it will be quite useless for the “parallel passage”
  marine-storekeeper to point out, even if he can, earlier uses of
  either image. Neither was a _stock_ image at the time of use.

Footnote 57:

  _H. D._, No. (or Stück) 11 and part of 12; xi. 144 _sq._

Footnote 58:

  _Semiramis_, III. vi. _sub fin._

Footnote 59:

  _H. D._, No. 22 _sq._

Footnote 60:

  Ibid., 29 _sq._

Footnote 61:

  Ibid., 36 _sq._

Footnote 62:

  Some of the original dates of Lessing’s works may be usefully grouped
  in a note: Early critical work, 1750 onwards; _Abhandlungen über die
  Fabeln_, 1759; _Laocoön_, 1766; _Hamb. Dramaturgie_, 1767-68;
  _Anmerkungen über das Epigramm_, 1771. But the whole thirty years of
  his literary life—at least until his unlucky attack of
  anti-theological mania towards its close—were fruitful in criticism.

Footnote 63:

  This important and edifying problem has attracted much attention from
  scholars. M. Kont, the author of a really admirable monograph on
  _Lessing et l’Antiquité_ (2 vols., Paris, 1894-9), devotes almost an
  excursus to it. The original may be found in vol. 15 of Herr Göring’s
  (the collected) ed., and it is fair to say that the latter part of
  Lessing’s dissertation does much to save the earlier.

Footnote 64:

  Again see M. Kont for comment and the “Anmerkungen über das Epigramm,”
  _Works_, xv. 73 _sq._ for text. Lessing also proclaimed his admiration
  for Martial in his preface to the early collection of his writings, in
  1753.

Footnote 65:

  The not uncommon ascription even of this is a result of that unjust
  neglect or depreciation of Scaliger and Castelvetro and the other
  Italians, which we have attempted _pro viribus_ to repair.

Footnote 66:

  Lessing’s curiosity as to at least the English Drama was so insatiable
  that he actually translated part of Crisp’s (Fanny Burney’s “Daddy”
  Crisp’s) _Virginia_—that play, the doleful effects of whose failure or
  doubtful success Macaulay, according to Mrs Ellis, so much
  exaggerated.

Footnote 67:

  That he knows and quotes the _Arte Nuevo_ is much more surprising than
  that he does not fully comprehend Lope’s position.

Footnote 68:

  _Eth. Nic._, VII. ii. 10.

Footnote 69:

  I wish that M. Kont had not fallen into a common error by saying that
  Bernays has “proved” Lessing’s interpretation wrong in part. When will
  people learn, in critical discussion, to see that to “make a thing
  probable” is not to “prove” it?

Footnote 70:

  Apparently Lessing would not have disagreed much with the reactionary
  modern who said that “the only really valuable articles in the present
  English school curriculum are Greek and Euclid.”

Footnote 71:

  Not that he did not pay some attention to Old German: but it had
  little effect on him, and he was evidently fonder of the fifteenth
  century than of the thirteenth. Nor is what has been said above to be
  taken as meaning that Gottsched himself neglected mediæval writers. On
  the contrary, he studied them very carefully as a part of his general
  patriotic “Germanism.” Only he did not in the least feel their drift.
  Opinions on Lessing’s own attitude to mediæval literature differ
  remarkably, but I cannot see much real appreciation in it.

Footnote 72:

  _V. sup._, vol. ii. p. 523. As we have seen, J. A. Schlegel had
  translated the Frenchman when Lessing was barely of age.

Footnote 73:

  To illustrate this before going further, we may take account both of
  the _Theatrical Miscellanies_, which fill vols. vii. and viii. of the
  _Works_, and of the similar miscellanies of a more general kind
  contained in vol. xiv. The latter include many short reviews and notes
  of the kind elsewhere noticed: the former supply by far the most
  remarkable instance of that extraordinary _industry_—that mania, so to
  speak, for assimilating all the material furnished by older and more
  accomplished literatures—which is the great note of this period of
  German culture. Much, as was almost necessary, is mere abstract, such
  as in vol. 7 the above-noticed analysis of Crisp’s _Virginia_ and the
  long article on the Tragedies of Seneca, where, however, there is not
  a little actual criticism of Brumoy, &c. The _Lives_ of Thomson
  (“Jacob” Thomson) and of Destouches show us by contrast what a great
  thing Dr Johnson did in elaborating the biographical-critical
  _causerie_: and even the _Dissertations_ on _tragédie larmoyante_ give
  little more than a frame of Lessing’s, the painters being Chassiron
  and Gellert. One article in vol. 8, “Von Johann Dryden,” might have
  been of the very highest critical interest; but it is a mere fragment.
  And the “Outlines of a History of the English Stage,” though showing
  Lessing’s astonishing scholarship in his favourite subject, are only
  outlines.

Footnote 74:

  vi.-ix. of the edition cited.

Footnote 75:

  This occupies more than fifty pages (91-145) of vol. vi.

Footnote 76:

  Lessing is less tolerant in this case than in that of Martial. The
  fact is that, in spite of its outrageousness, the libel would be
  rather amusing if it were not so exceedingly _tautologous_—with the
  tautology of a certain class of _graffiti_.

Footnote 77:

  Vol. ix.

Footnote 78:

  P. 205.

Footnote 79:

  P. 173.

Footnote 80:

  xv. 73-155. The _thirteenth_ volume is wholly archæological, and
  contains among other things the polemic with Klotz as to the
  _Laocoön_, and the tractate _On Ancient Representations of Death_.

Footnote 81:

  _Ueber die sogenannten Fabeln aus den Zeiten der Minnesinger_, xvi.
  47-87.

Footnote 82:

  P. 270. The Germans could not get nearer to the title than _Der
  Schwärmer oder Herumstreifer_. I suppose _Der Schlenderer_ would have
  been not “noble” enough. Lessing’s English does not seem to have been
  very idiomatic, for he says that the word “Rambler” means properly “a
  landlooper who has no regular abiding-place.”

Footnote 83:

  _V. sup._, ii. 267.

Footnote 84:

  It is curious that three great critics of the three great literary
  countries of modern Europe, Lessing, Sainte-Beuve, and Mr Arnold,
  should all have forgotten in their later years, the caution, “Be not
  critical _overmuch_.”

Footnote 85:

  See, for instance, the art. on Hagedorn, xx. 108.

Footnote 86:

  I most particularly, for instance, do _not_ wish to seem of the mind
  of an American Professor who announces in a periodical as I revise
  this book that he believes he has “overthrown most of Lessing’s ideas”
  in the _Laocoön_, “shown that his statements about Homer are wrong,
  his psychology wrong, and his reasoning often fallacious.”

Footnote 87:

  Lessing did not always keep so cool. The _Briefe Antiquarischen
  Inhalts_ (vol. 13, ed. cit.) not unfrequently betray a rise of
  temperature, and at the last boil over in coarse and self-forgetful
  language.

Footnote 88:

  _Deutsche Litteraturdenkmale._ Heilbronn, 1883. One cannot be too
  grateful for the admirable re-edition of this by Herr L. Geiger.
  Berlin, 1902.

Footnote 89:

  Mr David Hannay, Introduction to _Jacob Faithful_. London, 1895.

Footnote 90:

  Goethe, _Conv. Eck._, i. 125, says _none_.

Footnote 91:

  As in his smartness (p. 12, ed. cit.) on the phrase (which he
  misattributes, but this is nothing), “Ihro Majestät Glanzen wie ein
  Karfunkel am Finger der Jetzigen Zeit.” “Peut-on,” asks this other
  Majesty with fine irony, “rien de plus mauvais? Pourquoi une
  escarboucle? _Est-ce que le temps a un doigt?_ Quand on le représente,
  on le peint avec des ailes, parcequ’il s’envole sans cesse, avec un
  clepsydre parceque les heures le divisent, et on arme son _bras_ d’un
  faulx pour désigner qu’il fauche ou détruit tout ce qui existe.” The
  question as to the carbuncle is, of course, an example of pure
  ignorance, as is the general objection to the consecrated phrase and
  figure of the “finger of time” and its ring. But “arms” generally have
  “fingers,” unless these are cut off; and how, _Ihro Majestät_, does
  Time work his scythe without them?

Footnote 92:

  Quoted by Geiger, _op. cit._, p. xxvi.

Footnote 93:

  “_Tot verba, tot pondera_.”—Ibid., p. 18.

Footnote 94:

  P. 23.

Footnote 95:

  By an accident not worth dilating upon I was unable to incorporate the
  results of careful reading of König and Conti in the text. The
  former’s treatise on Taste is very respectable for its time, and must
  then have been quite stimulating; but it belongs to the obsolete box
  of our matter. Taste, excellent in the palmy times of Greek
  literature, declined later, was revived by the Romans, lost in the
  Middle Ages, recovered at the Renaissance, lost again and recovered by
  the French, and so on. He is much cumbered (as some other excellent
  persons have been) about the origin of the _word_ Taste—deprives the
  Spaniards of the honour of inventing it, and very properly finds its
  origin in Græco-Roman times. It must be natural, but can be improved
  by acquirement. It is more _immediate_ than judgment. It extends to
  quite trivial things—snuff, wine, foppery in dress, sensual pleasures,
  &c.

  Conti’s work, in the edition quoted, has the great drawback of being
  presented almost wholly, as far as the critical part of it is
  concerned, in abstracts made from MS. by the editor. It consists,
  besides Letters to the Doge Marco Foscarini, to Maffei, to Muratori,
  &c., of Treatises on “Imitation,” “Poetic Fantasy,” and the like and
  of animadversions on classical and Italian Poetry, on Fracastoro, on
  Gravina, and others. It does not come to very much.

Footnote 96:

  One celebrated person, much associated with it in some ways, and
  referred to in passing above, will not appear here. Horace Walpole
  did, for such a carpet knight, real service in the general movement;
  but he was a literary critic _pour rire_ only. His admiration of Mme.
  de Sévigné is not really much more to his credit than his sapient
  dictum (to Bentley, Feb. 23, 1755) that _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_ is
  “forty times more nonsensical than the worst translation of an Italian
  opera-book.” “Notre Dame des Rochers” talked of subjects that
  interested him in a manner which he could understand: Shakespeare was
  neither “Gothic” nor modern. So he liked the one and despised the
  other—uncritically in both cases.

Footnote 97:

  _Choice Collection of Scots Poems._ In three Parts. Reprinted in 1
  vol. (Glasgow, 1869).

Footnote 98:

  _The Evergreen, The Tea-Table Miscellany._ Reprinted in 4 vols.
  (Glasgow, 1876).

Footnote 99:

  Said to be Ambrose Philips. If so, the book, despite its uncritical
  and heterogeneous character, is “Namby-Pamby’s” best work by far.
  There is a reprint, without date (3 vols.), among the very valuable
  series of such things which were published by Pearson _c._ 1870.

Footnote 100:

  For more on them, see chap. vi. of this book.

Footnote 101:

  Ausonius, Ep. 77.

Footnote 102:

  With acknowledgments to Longinus.

Footnote 103:

  Mr Gosse, I find, agrees with me on this point. It is well known that
  ignorance of German was almost (Chesterfield, I think, in encouraging
  his son to the study, says roundly that it was quite) universal among
  Englishmen in the mid-eighteenth century.

Footnote 104:

  Gray’s _Works_ (ed. Gosse, 4 vols., London, 1884), ii. p. 106, Letter
  xliv., dated April, without the year; but the next gives it: 1742.

Footnote 105:

  Gray has been upbraided with his description (in part at least) of
  Boswell’s Paoli-book as “a dialogue between a green goose and a hero.”
  It does him no discredit; in fact, he might have summarised the whole
  of Boswell’s work, had he lived to see it, as that of a green goose
  with a semi-heroic love for heroes.

Footnote 106:

  I am well aware that the “parallel-passagers” have tried their jaws on
  these.

Footnote 107:

  After all, he may be forgiven much apparent over-valuation of Mason
  for this name. Whatever its meaning between the friends, it “speaks”
  the author of _Elfrida_ and _Caractacus_, and the _Monologues_ and the
  _Odes_, and all but those lines of the epitaph on his wife which Gray
  wrote for him. “To skroddle” should have been naturalised for “to
  write minor poetry.”

Footnote 108:

  As printed in Mr Gosse’s edition he is made to say that the _Moral
  Ode_ was written “almost two hundred years _after_ Chaucer’s time.”
  The sense, however, as well as the use of the word “Semi-Saxon,” shows
  that he meant “before,” so that “after” must be a slip either of his
  own pen or of the later press.

Footnote 109:

  See Letter to Wharton, October 7, 1757 (cxxxvi., ii., 340, ed. cit.).

Footnote 110:

   I mean, of course, nobody except specialists. On the vexed question
  of Gray’s _direct_ knowledge of Norse, on the priority or
  contemporaneousness of Percy’s “Five Pieces,” and on the subject
  generally, an interesting treatise, Mr F. E. Finlay’s _Scandinavian
  Influences on the English Romantic Movement_ (Boston, U.S.A., 1903),
  has appeared since the text was written.

Footnote 111:

  Despite the curious infuriation which such attention seems to excite
  in some minds by no means devoid of celestial quality. Gradually it
  will be seen that current views of prosody are a sort of “tell-tale”
  or index of the state of poetic criticism generally. They concern us
  here, however, only at certain moments.

Footnote 112:

  My copy of him is Dodsley’s third edition, in 2 vols., of the _Poems
  and Essays_ (London, 1768), with the second edition of the additional
  volume containing the _Letters_ (London, 1769). These latter are
  described by Gray in the less agreeable Graian manner, as “about
  nothing but” the Leasowes “and his own writings, with two or three
  neighbouring clergymen who wrote verses also.”

Footnote 113:

  Ed. cit., ii. 10-13, 158-161, and elsewhere.

Footnote 114:

  Most of the quotations following are found in two Essays on “Books and
  Writers,” ii. 157-180, 228-239.

Footnote 115:

  ii. 172; ii. 167. The first of these has been echoed, perhaps
  unconsciously, by more than one great Romantic writer. For the second,
  compare Regnier’s _regret pensif et confus, D’avoir été et n'être
  plus_. Shenstone’s _Letters_ (as is implied in the very terms of
  Gray’s sneer) deal with literary subjects freely enough; but their
  criticism is rarely important, though I have noted a good many places.
  Some of the most interesting (p. 58 _sq._, ed. cit.) concern Spenser,
  and Shenstone’s gradual conversion “from trifling and laughing to
  being really in love with him.” From another (lxii. p. 175) we learn
  that at any rate when writing, S. was still in the dark about “the
  distance of the rhymes” in _Lycidas_. There is seen in Letter xc.,
  viii. sq., on “Fables,” an intimation (c. iii. p. 321) of the ballad
  plan with Percy; praise of _The Rambler_; a defence of light poetry as
  being still poetry, &c. &c. It is almost all interesting as an example
  of Critical _Education_.

Footnote 116:

  By Messrs Hales & Furnivall. 3 vols. and Supplement. (London,
  1867-68.) As for Percy’s Scandinavian Enquiries, see note above.

Footnote 117:

  Vol. i. appeared in 1756, vol. ii. not till 1782—which gap of a
  quarter of a century is not imperceptible in the work itself, and must
  be remembered in reading the text.

Footnote 118:

  On this, as on other points in this chapter and chap. v., and on
  chapter i. of the last Book of the last volume generally, a most
  valuable companion has been supplied since my text was written by Mr
  D. Nichol Smith’s excellent edition of _Eighteenth Century Essays on
  Shakespeare_. (Glasgow, 1903.)

Footnote 119:

  The full title is _Observations on the Faërie Queene of Spenser_ ed. 1
  (London, 1754); ed. 2, 1762 (of which is my copy). From Hughes’s
  editions of 1715 to Upton’s of 1758 (_after_ Warton’s first edition) a
  good deal of attention had been paid to Spenser, if not quite
  according to knowledge. For a long list of imitations in the
  eighteenth century see Mr H. A. Beers (_English Romanticism in the
  Eighteenth Century_, London, 1899, pp. 854-55, note), who copies it
  from Prof. Phelps.

Footnote 120:

  i. 15, ed. cit.

Footnote 121:

  Ed. cit., i. 96.

Footnote 122:

  Originally issued in the years 1774-78-81. The editions of 1824 and
  1840, with additional notes by Price and others, are valuable for
  matter; and that of Mr W. C. Hazlitt (4 vols., London, 1871), with the
  assistance of Drs Furnival, Morris, Skeat, and others, _in_valuable.
  But Warton’s own part is necessarily more and more obscured in them.

Footnote 123:

  _De quo fabula?_

Footnote 124:

  See Appendix I.

Footnote 125:

  He is, however, exquisitely characteristic in his description of
  Addison’s own critical work (see the Bohn ed., ii. 383) as
  “discovering his own good taste, and calculated to improve that of the
  reader, but otherwise of no great merit.”

Footnote 126:

  _e.g._ iii. 171: “_Men’s minds._ Men’s, for the genitive plural of
  _man_, is not allowable.”

Footnote 127:

  _Vide_ ed. cit., ii. 417, and especially iii. 389-91, a long note of
  very great interest. I do not know whether Hurd had condescended to
  take a hint from the humble dissenting Mason (_v. inf._)

Footnote 128:

  He was born only twenty years after the death of Dryden, and died the
  year before Tennyson was born.

Footnote 129:

  My copy in 10 vols. (London, 1777) appears to be made up of different
  editions of the separate books—the fifth of the _Horace_ and
  _Dialogues_, the third of the _Cowley_.

Footnote 130:

  These qualities are particularly shown in a really admirable note, ii.
  107-15, on the method and art of criticism, with special reference to
  Longinus, Bouhours, and Addison. Hurd is, however, once more, and in
  more detail, too severe on Addison. It may be repeated that Lessing
  pays very particular attention to Hurd in the _Hamburgische
  Dramaturgie_, and speaks of him with great respect.

Footnote 131:

  ii. 153.

Footnote 132:

  ii. 154.

Footnote 133:

  ii. 220.

Footnote 134:

  Almost too liberal, as where he falls foul of Jeremias Holstenius for
  saying the plain truth that “but for the _Argonautics_, there had been
  no fourth book of the _Æneis_” (iii. 49).

Footnote 135:

  iii. 153.

Footnote 136:

  P. 464.

Footnote 137:

  Boswell, Globe ed., pp. 363, 441.

Footnote 138:

  Ibid., p. 598.

Footnote 139:

  _Works_, ed. cit., vol. vi., p. 196.

Footnote 140:

  In _Letter VIII._, ibid., p. 266 _sq._

Footnote 141:

  P. 271.

Footnote 142:

  P. 273.

Footnote 143:

  P. 290.

Footnote 144:

  P. 299.

Footnote 145:

  P. 306.

Footnote 146:

  P. 309.

Footnote 147:

  P. 313.

Footnote 148:

  Hurd knew Gray (who, characteristically in both ways, described him as
  “the last man who wore stiff-topped gloves”) pretty well (see the
  references in Mr Gosse’s Index). He may have caught some heat from one
  who had plenty, though he concealed it.

Footnote 149:

  “Skroddles” was _William_.

Footnote 150:

  My copy contains all three bound together. It is interesting, though
  not surprising, to find that there was no demand for the two original
  and valuable constituents, and a brisk one for the commonplace third.

Footnote 151:

  _Power of Numbers_, p. 9.

Footnote 152:

  Ibid., p. 27.

Footnote 153:

  _Prosaic Numbers_, passim.

Footnote 154:

  Mason’s very errors are interesting, as where his delight in recovered
  _rhythm_—in full melody of variety—leads him to something like the old
  blasphemy of _rhyme_ (“one of the lowest ornaments and greatest
  shackles of modern poesy” _Power of Numbers_, p. 14).

Footnote 155:

  Even at this early date Mason was able to quote not a few writers—
  Pemberton, Manwaring, Malcolm, Gay, who, as well as Geddes, Foster,
  Galley, and others, had dealt with this subject. In fact, the list of
  such authors in the eighteenth century is quite long, though few of
  them are very important. For an excellent reasoned bibliography see Mr
  T. S. Omond’s _English Metrists_ (Tunbridge Wells, 1903). Henry
  Pemberton, Gresham Professor of Physic, and a man of various ability,
  published on the to us surprising subject of Glover’s _Leonidas_, in
  1738, _Observations on Poetry_, which I had hunted in the catalogues
  for a long time, when Mr Gregory Smith kindly gave me a copy. It
  shows, as the election of its text may indicate, and as its date would
  further suggest, no very enthusiastic or imaginative appreciation of
  the Muse, but is remarkably learned, not merely in the ancients and
  the modern Frenchmen, but in Italians like Minturno and Castelvetro.
  Pemberton deals with Epic and Dramatic poetry—their rise, dignity,
  fable, sentiment, character, language, and difference; with
  Versification, where his standpoint may be guessed, from his
  denouncing “the mixture of iambic and trochaic” as a blemish on
  _L’Allegro_ and _Il Penseroso_; with the Sublime. He is not an
  inspiring or inspired writer, but holds some position, both as
  influential on the Germans, who not seldom quote him, and in the
  history of Prosody.

Footnote 156:

  Not Cowper’s hero, but a son of “Picturesque” Gilpin. Mitford had been
  a pupil of Gilpin the elder.

Footnote 157:

  Foster’s (John) _Essay on the Different Nature of Accent and Quantity_
  (second edition, Eton, 1763) is duly before me also, but I must not
  touch it here.

Footnote 158:

  As _An Essay on the Harmony of Language_. My friend, Mr T. S. Omond,
  in the quite invaluable bibliography referred to above, thinks this
  “clearer, shorter, more pointed” than the second. It is at any rate
  well to remember that when it appeared, Johnson had ten years to live,
  and Scott, Wordsworth, and Coleridge were in their nurseries.

Footnote 159:

  _Harmony of Language_, second edition, p. 51.

Footnote 160:

  Ibid., p. 81.

Footnote 161:

  20 vols., ed. Assézat and Tourneux: Paris, 1875-76. I had known
  Diderot before, not merely from Carlyle and Mr Morley, but from
  Génin’s extraordinarily well-chosen _Pensées Choisies_ in the Didot
  collection. But I remember very well, after more than a quarter of a
  century, the delight with which I read this edition as the successive
  volumes reached me at their appearance. I cannot take them down
  without that anticipation of sentences at particular places of the
  page which one only feels in such a case. They are quarrelling with
  the edition now, of course: but that does not matter.

Footnote 162:

  Cf. p. 160, vol. vi. ed. cit. “_Vous avez péché contre les règles
  d’Aristote, d’Horace, de Vida, et de Le Bossu._” Even if (as so much
  else in the book is) this was partly suggested by Sterne, it is none
  the less a genuine fling of Diderot’s own irony and recalcitrance. And
  an indignant note of the earlier edition of Brière, shocked in 1821 at
  the substitution of Le Bossu (then much forgotten) for Boileau, who
  was, though on the eve of dethronement, in full dictatorship, is a
  valuable document for us, and for this chapter.

Footnote 163:

  _Œuvres_, ed. cit., v. 211-227.

Footnote 164:

  The _éloge_ dates from 1761: exactly the middle point between the
  earliest of Hurd’s _Dissertations_ in 1757 and his Letters in 1765
  (_v. sup._).

Footnote 165:

  Ibid., 228-239.

Footnote 166:

  _V. sup._, ii. p. 303.

Footnote 167:

  _Œuvres_, vi. 366, 367.

Footnote 168:

  Let us remember that this evil-famed book itself contains admirable
  critical passages, notably (chap. xxxviii), that attack on the French
  theatre which Lessing extracted in Nos. 84, 85 of the _Hamburgische
  Dramaturgie_.

Footnote 169:

  _Œuvres_, iii. 200-407.

Footnote 170:

  Fortunately the contents and indices of the Assézat-Tourneux edition
  are admirably abundant and clear: a merit not so common in French
  books as some others.

Footnote 171:

  _Œuvres_, viii. 339-426. The English reader has at his disposal the
  excellent translation of Mr W. H. Pollock (London, 1883), with a
  preface by Sir Henry Irving. I should like also to mention here Mrs L.
  Tollemache’s _Diderot’s Thoughts on Art and Style_, an interesting
  selection which has, I think, been more than once published.

Footnote 172:

  _Œuvres_, vii. 299-410 (with appendices).

Footnote 173:

  _Œuvres_, xi. 368-373.

Footnote 174:

  The chief exceptions, such as a letter to Panckoucke (May 25, 1764)
  and a sensible one to Chamfort (Oct. 6, same year) have a very little.
  The words _Vous admirez Richardson_ to the elder Mirabeau (April 8,
  1767) may raise expectations: they will be cruelly dashed. _Cf._ the
  indignant renunciation of the description _homme de lettres_ a little
  later (May 13), and the long and important review of his own career to
  Saint-Germain, dated “1770-26/2.” The fact is, that a maniac of
  egotism and self-torment cannot be a critic, the subject under
  consideration being inevitably turned out of court by Self.

Footnote 175:

  One book of some traditional note and interest from the eminence of
  its author in other ways, Condillac’s _Art d'Écrire_ (which forms part
  of his elaborate _Cours d’Étude_ for the Prince of Parma: Parma,
  1769-1773), was not there noticed. It is of little intrinsic
  importance, being a mere treatise on “Composition”—a common-sense and
  common-place _Rhetoric_ adjusted to late French eighteenth century
  standards. Its definition of style as depending on “netteté _et_
  caractère,” is an obvious attempt to combine the elder with the
  Buffonian ideal.

Footnote 176:

  My copy is the Didot edition of the _Œuvres_, in three large vols.
  (Paris, 1873). As, however, this is very cumbrous to hold, I also use
  and here cite the smaller separate edition (same publishers: Paris,
  1876) of the _De l’Allemagne_.

Footnote 177:

  Even after publishing the two previous volumes, I find myself accused
  of “_not having taken the trouble to acquaint myself with_ the fact
  that the application of psychological tests has profoundly altered
  criticism,” or words to that effect. εἴθ’ ὤφελ’ Ἀργοῦς μὴ διαπτάσθαι.
  I only wish I had _not_ had to thread these more dismal and dangerous
  Symplegades! But I am at any rate trying to save others from their
  danger.

Footnote 178:

  In the _Nouvelle Héloise_. The omission (perhaps due to a juvenile
  unwillingness to acknowledge her idol indebted to anybody) is the more
  striking because we know, and could have been sure if we did not know,
  that she was early acquainted with, and enthralled by, the English
  master.

Footnote 179:

  I. 216 of the larger ed. cited.

Footnote 180:

  220 of the larger ed. cited.

Footnote 181:

  Ibid., pp. 252, 253.

Footnote 182:

  Ibid., p. 257.

Footnote 183:

  Ibid., p. 263.

Footnote 184:

  Ibid., p. 265.

Footnote 185:

   Goethe and Schiller might laugh at her; but there is no doubt that
  they were secretly flattered at her interest in the things of Germany.

Footnote 186:

  The Duke of Rovigo’s blunt information in his letter of expulsion,
  that “the book is not French” (see the _Preface_, or any account of
  Mme. de Staël), summarises his master’s terror very well.

Footnote 187:

  P. 176 of the smaller edition cited; i. 80, of the larger.

Footnote 188:

  “De l’art dramatique.”

Footnote 189:

   Chap. xxvi. _L’idéal du caractère tragique consiste dans le triomphe
  que la volonté remporte sur le destin et sur nos passions; le comique
  exprime au contraire l’empire de l’instincts physique sur l’existence
  morale._ From which it will follow that _Hamlet_ and _Lear_ are not
  tragedies, and that _As You Like It_ and _Much Ado About Nothing_ are
  not comedies.

Footnote 190:

   P. 340, chap. ii. 148.

Footnote 191:

  Of course not in the worst English connotation, but only in that of
  “commonplace,” “ordinary,” “undistinguished.”

Footnote 192:

  M. Des Essarts in the Petit de Julleville _History_.

Footnote 193:

  For _René_ is only an episode of the _Génie_ itself; and _Les Martyrs_
  a prose-poem in illustration of its theories.

Footnote 194:

   See vol. i. p. 425.

Footnote 195:

  Chateaubriand’s _Mélanges Littéraires_ contain in their later numbers
  some interesting reviews, especially that of February 1819 on the
  _Annales Littéraires_, which supplied almost the _Défense et
  Illustration_ of the Romantic outburst. But I do not know that the
  early pieces on English literature dating from the last year of the
  eighteenth century, are not as important. In these the writer, either
  from policy (for though he had a friendly editor in Fontanes, he was
  writing under the eyes of Bonaparte’s police) or really imperfect
  conversion, approximates much more to the “dunghill-and-pearl” view of
  Shakspere than the innocent might think likely, and has not quite
  reached his future state (_v. inf._) of illumination as to _Ossian_.
  He is very severe on Young, and has a very curious passage on the
  English view of the subject at the moment, which is probably not far
  from the truth, and at any rate helps us to understand the
  half-way-house attitude of men like Jeffrey and Campbell. The Queen
  Anne men, we are told, were at a discount—Richardson was little read,
  Hume and Gibbon were thought gallicisers, and so forth. But these
  things are at best useful sidelights on their author’s position in the
  _Génie_.

Footnote 196:

  I use the 2-vol. ed. of the _Collection Didot_.

Footnote 197:

  Six “books” of _dogma_, twelve of _recherches littéraires_, six of
  _culte_, is the author’s own summary of his scheme (_Génie_, II. i.
  1).

Footnote 198:

  Ed. cit., ii. 306-326.

Footnote 199:

  II. i. 5.

Footnote 200:

  II. ii. 5-8.

Footnote 201:

  II. ii. 10.

Footnote 202:

  Vol. I. p. 235.

Footnote 203:

  II. iii. 2, 3.

Footnote 204:

  Vol. I. p. 257.

Footnote 205:

  II. iii. 7.

Footnote 206:

  II. iv.

Footnote 207:

  Ibid., chap. iii.

Footnote 208:

  Chap. viii. It is a pity that Chateaubriand did not live long enough
  to read Mr Ruskin (who had begun to write before his death) on “The
  Angel of the Sea”—one of the great conceptions whose poetic
  suggestiveness he has himself here indicated.

Footnote 209:

  This fills the whole of the Fifth or last Book of the Second Part, and
  shows the author at nearly his best.

Footnote 210:

  _Il y règne_ (_in_ Saint Louis) _une sombre imagination très propre à
  la peinture de cette Egypte, pleine de souvenirs et de tombeaux, et
  qui vit passer tour à tour les Pharaons, les Ptolemées, les solitaires
  de la Thebaide, et les soudans des barbares_.

Footnote 211:

  I have not thought it necessary to notice Chateaubriand’s literary
  judgments in the _Essai sur les Révolutions_ at the beginning, or in
  the _Mémoires d’Outre Tombe_ at the end of his career. The first,
  interesting as it is, is too crude (_v. inf._, Bk. viii. Ch. ii.), the
  second too much spoilt by “cooking of spleen,” and both too personal
  and egotistic.

Footnote 212:

  Chateaubriand, Joubert’s intimate friend, printed some of this
  privately after the author’s death; and in 1842 Joubert’s nephew
  published two vols. of _Pensées_, Letters, &c. These, with some
  subsequent augmentations, had reached their 10th ed. in 1901. There is
  an English translation of part by Mr Attwood, and perhaps others.

Footnote 213:

  Sainte-Beuve, Sylvestre de Sacy, Saint-Marc-Girardin, Géruzez, and
  Poitou—the last a scholarly lawyer and man of letters, who contributed
  to the _Deux Mondes_, wrote books of various kinds, and died in 1880.

Footnote 214:

  At p. 203 of the usual ed., extending to the end, and filling nearly
  half the book.

Footnote 215:

  P. 265 ed. cit.

Footnote 216:

  P. 273-300.

Footnote 217:

  P. 387.

Footnote 218:

  xxiii. viii., pp. 303, 304.

Footnote 219:

  Ibid., xvi., p. 305.

Footnote 220:

  P. 376. But as there is in the book a sufficient index, I need not
  perhaps multiply note-indications.

Footnote 221:

  The numerous articles on the individual persons named and to be named—
  most of which will be found indicated in the general index-volume to
  the _Causeries du Lundi_, &c.—are importantly supplemented by a more
  general dealing in _Chateaubriand et Son Groupe Littéraire_ (_v.
  inf._, Bk. viii. Ch. ii.). This is a “standing order” of reference to
  the end of the chapter.

Footnote 222:

  Especially the brilliant paper in _C. du L._, i. 371-391, on _M. de
  Feletz et la Crit. Litt. sous l’Empire_, February 25, 1850.

Footnote 223:

  2 vols., Paris, 1839.

Footnote 224:

  _v._ Victor upon William.

Footnote 225:

  His chief work available in book-form is his _Cours de Littérature
  Dramatique_, 6 vols., Paris, 1825.

Footnote 226:

  This makes the almost inevitable coupling of him with his contemporary
  and (_mutatis mutandis_) namesake, Jeffrey, a little unfair. He was a
  genuine critical highwayman, who fired at the coach wherever he found
  it: Jeffrey only peppered passengers who went the stages after he had
  himself got down.

Footnote 227:

  _Annales Littéraires_, 5 vols., Paris, 1818-1824.

Footnote 228:

  I have seen things of his; but have somehow missed his _Œuvres_, 10
  vols., Paris, 1828.

Footnote 229:

  Andrieux deserves a note, perhaps, as having occupied a place of
  strength—the chair of French Literature in the Collége de France—
  during the critical time 1814-1833, and as having defended the Capitol
  valiantly against the invaders. But his valiancy was greater than his
  _vaillance_; and instead of criticising him it is nobler to salute
  him, with M. de Jouy and some others, as respectably mistaken.

Footnote 230:

  9 vols., Paris, 1811-1824. Ginguené died in 1816, and the book,
  published in part posthumously from his MSS., was completed by another
  hand.

Footnote 231:

  It may be found subjoined to the _Pantheon Littéraire_ edition of La
  Harpe vol. iii., Paris, 1840. In his _Œuvres_, 5 vols. (Paris, 1826),
  and _Œuvres Posthumes_, 3 vols. (Paris, 1828-30), there is not much
  else of importance.

Footnote 232:

  Chap. iii., _op. cit._

Footnote 233:

  Chap. vi.

Footnote 234:

  4 vols., Paris, 1817. The lectures had been delivered in 1811-14. I
  have had to rely on my reading of the British Museum copy, the only
  one which I have ever seen in a catalogue, though rather high-priced,
  having been sold before I could get it, and my advertisements for
  another (it is a book worth having) not being successful. Some
  accounts (_e.g._, that of Vapereau) are quite unfair to it.

Footnote 235:

  _Mélanges_, 6 vols., Paris, 1828-1830.

Footnote 236:

  I must find room, if only in a note, for the unfortunate Auger, who
  succeeded Suard as universal provider of _éloges_ and Introductions in
  the classic sense, who served as victim to one of Daudet’s most
  ignoble transcripts of reality in _L’Immortel_, and whose _ton sec et
  rogue_ Sainte-Beuve has somewhere despatched and impaled for ever in
  one of his really immortal phrases.

Footnote 237:

  Some will no doubt expect that a third, Guizot, should be joined to
  them. He did much reviewing in his youth (as did his first wife,
  Pauline de Meulan), and his much later companion volumes on Corneille
  and Shakespeare are more than respectable. But he was perhaps even
  less of a critic “in his heart” than Cousin.

Footnote 238:

  Besides his better known works, such as those on Plato and Descartes,
  and on the _grandes dames_ of the seventeenth century, which touch the
  subject on different sides, his _Fragments Littéraires_ (Paris, 1843)
  may be consulted. I fear that his summary dismissal may surprise some
  and enrage others: but I cannot help it. I have nothing to do with his
  psychology, and he has next to nothing to do with _my_ criticism.

Footnote 239:

  _Œuvres_, Paris, 1854-1858.

Footnote 240:

  _C. de L._ I. 108, _sq._ on the literary work of both Cousin and
  Villemain.

Footnote 241:

  It dates from the spring of 1823: I have used the complete posthumous
  edition (Paris, 1854).

Footnote 242:

  For so great an ironist Beyle _did_ lack humour to a surprising
  degree.

Footnote 243:

  P. 6, ed. cit.

Footnote 244:

   P. 14 _sq._

Footnote 245:

  As some have said: “When you _read_ _Twelfth Night_, you are in
  Elysium; when you _see_ it, you are not even in Illyria.”

Footnote 246:

  P. 19.

Footnote 247:

  P. 32.

Footnote 248:

  Lamartine, in a letter given in the book (p. 129 _sq._), says roundly
  of Beyle: “Il n’y a selon lui et selon nous d’autres règles que les
  exemples du génie”; and though I do not remember that Beyle himself
  formulates this Brunonian (_v._ vol. ii. p. 95 note) trenchancy, he
  evidently adopts it.

Footnote 249:

  P. 180 _sq._, ed. cit. _inf._ All this passage is important,
  especially the reference to B.'s habit of “taking the other side,” a
  habit common with critics, but not critical.

Footnote 250:

   _C. du L._, ix. 314 _sq._

Footnote 251:

   It is fair to say that the oddity is Beyle’s own. See for instance
  his _Lettres Inédites_, p. 235.

Footnote 252:

  _Lettres Intimes de Stendhal_ (Paris, 1892).

Footnote 253:

  My copy is in 2 vols. (Paris, 1879).

Footnote 254:

  Himself a terrible critic in a certain sense: hardly one at all in
  others, and in most parts of ours.

Footnote 255:

  There is no complete edition, either of Nodier’s collected work or of
  his criticism: and many of his books are not at all easy to obtain
  separately. The editor of the _Tales_, &c., in the Charpentier
  collection, has, however, most wisely prefixed certain capital
  articles to the various volumes—_Des Types en Littérature to the
  Romans_; _Quelques Observations sur la nouvelle école Littéraire to
  Les Proscrits_; _Du Fantastique en Littérature_ to the _Contes_. All
  these are important.

Footnote 256:

  One of Crapelet’s best produced books (Paris, 1829).

Footnote 257:

  The standard treatise on this is that of M. E. Krantz, _L’Esthétique
  de Descartes_: Paris, 1882.

Footnote 258:

  _Op. cit. sup._, Introduction.

Footnote 259:

  Halle, in the year named.

Footnote 260:

  Frankfort-on-the-Oder, 1750-58.

Footnote 261:

  Later, Baumgarten did formally, while admitting metre as a sort of
  adjunct of “perfection,” provide that a prose work such as _Telémaque_
  may be a poem, while verse compositions may not,—the old notion back
  again.

Footnote 262:

  Frankfort: 1750 1st vol., 1758 2nd. It was never finished.

Footnote 263:

  _Anfangsgründe aller schönen Wissenschaften_, 3 vols., Halle, 1748-50.

Footnote 264:

  He is thought to have derived something from Arnold, _Versuch und
  Anleitung zur Poesie der Deutschen_ (2nd ed., 1741), a book of which I
  am still in search, while I should like to have rather fuller
  opportunities than I have yet had of studying Baumgarten himself and
  some others of the earlier Germans.

Footnote 265:

  Leipzig, 1771-74, but mostly written much earlier. It was greatly
  enlarged twenty years later. Blankenberg’s _Zusätze_ came after this
  in 1796-98, and there are extensive _Appendices_ by others, making 8
  vols. (1792-1808).

Footnote 266:

  This book actually belongs to the nineteenth century, having been
  published at Berlin in 1803-5 (4 vols.) But Eberhard was then a man
  over sixty; he had published a _Theorie der schönen Künste und
  Wissenschaften_ twenty years earlier, and his general position is that
  of the third quarter of the eighteenth.

Footnote 267:

  _V. sup._, ii. 513, note. First published in 1741, it was constantly
  reprinted. André was a Jesuit, and his full name was Yves Marc _de
  L’Isle_ André, whence the rigid virtue of the British Museum insists
  that he shall be looked for under L.

Footnote 268:

  For Vico’s æsthetic, see, in addition to Professor Flint’s admirable
  _Vico_ (Edinburgh, 1882), the very interesting _Estetica_ of Signor
  Benedetto Croce (Part II. chap. v. pp. 228-243: Milan, Palermo, and
  Naples, 1902). This chapter, with some earlier ones, had been printed
  separately as a specimen the year before. I owe copies of both, with
  one of a still earlier series on _La Critica Letteraria_ (Rome, 1896),
  to Signor Croce’s kindness; and the drift of the last named, which
  condenses the _inesattezza_ of the term “literary criticism,” had
  itself prepared me for the disapproval (not unmixed) which he
  expresses of the first volume of this work as “deprived of method and
  determinate object.” But as I still see, or seem to see, my own object
  quite clearly defined before me, as I have found no fault in the
  compass which I use, and feel the helm of my method quite solid and
  obedient in my hand, I fear I must hold my course all the same. I
  shall only say that the sketch of criticism or æsthetic before Vico
  which precedes the chapter above referred to, shows remarkable
  knowledge and faculty of statement.

Footnote 269:

  The _Scienza_ first appeared in 1725, but was practically transformed
  in its second ed., 1730. Its ideas on poetry were further developed
  later; but anticipations of them appear even earlier in the _De
  Constantia Jurisprudentis_ of 1721, if not even in the still earlier
  Lectures—most of them but recently published—of 1699-1708.

Footnote 270:

  _Franciscus Baco in aureo de Aug. Sci. libello_, &c., vol. ii. p. 5 of
  Ferrari’s _Opere di G. Vico_ (6 vols., Milan, 1852). I owe the use of
  the copy of this, with which I have worked, to the kindness of
  Professor Flint.

Footnote 271:

  _Omnium scientiarum artiumque commune instrumentum est nova Critica._
  Ibid., p. 7.

Footnote 272:

  P. 11.

Footnote 273:

  Pp. 26-28.

Footnote 274:

  Ed. cit., iii. 265 _sq._

Footnote 275:

  P. 275, note.

Footnote 276:

  Ed. cit., iv. 161-245. The earlier books are not superfluous for our
  purpose.

Footnote 277:

  I may observe that Vico, though an extremely consistent thinker in
  reality, is apt to lay such stress on the particular side of his
  thought prominent at the moment, that it may deceive the unwary and
  must furnish the unscrupulous with handles. Compare, as one example of
  many, the attack on the notion of poets being “_natural_ Theologians,”
  at _De Const. Jurisp._ iii. 277, with the argument for their being
  “_political_ Theologians” a few pages later (pp. 295, 296), comparing
  also with both his later passage on “Teologia Poetica” in the second
  _Scienza_ (v. 155).

Footnote 278:

  Ed. cit., v. 1, 151-421, 422-461.

Footnote 279:

  v. 163.

Footnote 280:

  P. 168. Vico had anticipated this earlier.

Footnote 281:

  iv. 200. (See the _First_ draft.)

Footnote 282:

  No reasonable person will object to this the praise of Italian writers
  in the _De Stud. Rat._, p. 125.

Footnote 283:

  To do Vico full justice, we must admit that his object was less to
  break up Homer, as they break up Cædmon and Isaiah, than to attribute
  the whole work to the whole early Greek people.

Footnote 284:

  On Adam Smith and Gibbon a note must suffice. The former has actually
  left us nothing important in print concerning the subject, though he
  is known to have lectured on it, and though to the partisans of
  “psychological” criticism the _Moral Sentiments_ may seem pertinent.
  His line seems to have been pretty identical with those of Hume and of
  Blair, who knew and used Smith’s Lectures in preparing his own. As for
  Gibbon, his great work did not give very much opportunity for touching
  our subject, and he availed himself little of what it did give: though
  on Byzantine literature generally, and on some individuals—Photius,
  Sidonius, and others—he acquits himself well enough. His early _Essay
  on the Study of Literature_ is extremely general and quite
  unimportant.

Footnote 285:

  These are to be found almost _passim_ in the _Characteristics_ (my
  copy of which is the small 3 vol. ed., _s.l._, 1749), but chiefly in
  his _Advice to an Author_ (vol. i., ed. cit., p. 105-end) and in the
  _Third Miscellany_ (iii. 92-129).

Footnote 286:

  i. 147.

Footnote 287:

  iii. 187 _sq._

Footnote 288:

  i. 224, &c.

Footnote 289:

  iii. 173.

Footnote 290:

  i. 35.

Footnote 291:

  i. 147 _sq._

Footnote 292:

  i. 157 _sq._

Footnote 293:

  iii. 125.

Footnote 294:

  i. 163 _sq._

Footnote 295:

  The lively fashion in which Dr George Campbell in his _Philosophy of
  Rhetoric_ (_v. sup._, ii. 470) beats up his lordship’s quarters, on
  the score of precious and rococo style, is too much forgotten
  nowadays.

Footnote 296:

  The literary essays occur almost wholly in the First part (published
  in 1742: my copy is the “new edition” of the _Essays and Treatises_, 2
  vols.: London and Edinburgh, 1764).

Footnote 297:

  _Essay on Delicacy of Taste_, pp. 5, 7, ed. cit.

Footnote 298:

  _On the Rise and Progress of the Arts and Sciences_, ibid., p. 125.

Footnote 299:

  Ibid., p. 126.

Footnote 300:

  P. 141 _sq._

Footnote 301:

  _V. sup._, vol. ii. pp. 327, 417.

Footnote 302:

  _V. sup._, vol. ii. p. 418.

Footnote 303:

  _The Sceptic_, p. 186.

Footnote 304:

  Pp. 217-222.

Footnote 305:

  “Refinement” seems here to mean “conceit,” “elaborate diction.” But
  the “simplicity” of Lucretius, in any sense in which the quality can
  be said to be pushed to excess by Sophocles, is very hard to grasp.

Footnote 306:

  P. 257: “Whoever would assert an equality of genius and elegance
  between Ogilby and Milton, or Bunyan and Addison, would be thought to
  defend no less an extravagance,” &c.

Footnote 307:

  P. 258.

Footnote 308:

  P. 274.

Footnote 309:

  “I must take pleasure in the thing represented before I can take
  pleasure in the representation,” _v. sup._, vol. i. p. 381, _infra_ on
  Peacock himself.

Footnote 310:

  _Essay on Tragedy_, p. 243.

Footnote 311:

  I may be excused for referring to the parabasis at the beginning of
  the chapter, all the more that the text above was written considerably
  earlier than that digression.

Footnote 312:

  _A Philosophical Inquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime
  and Beautiful, with an Introductory Discourse concerning Taste: 1756._
  I use the Bohn edition of the _Works_, vol. i. pp. 49-181.

Footnote 313:

  _Op. cit._, p. 175 _sq._ But Burke does not seem to have reached the
  larger and deeper views of Lessing on this subject.

Footnote 314:

  See vol. ii. p. 485 _sq._

Footnote 315:

  Of this in turn Blair was perhaps thinking when he wrote the unlucky
  passage quoted in the last volume.

Footnote 316:

  Part III. § iv.

Footnote 317:

  Vol. ii. p. 417 _sq._

Footnote 318:

  III. § xxv.

Footnote 319:

  IV. § xix. i. 160, ed. cit.

Footnote 320:

  In the mood in which he did that eccentric frontispiece to the
  Maitland Club _Sir Bevis of Hampton_ (Edinburgh, 1838) at the
  _abgeschmackt_-ness of which the late excellent Prof. Kölbing
  shuddered when he edited _Arthur and Merlin_ (Leipzig, 1890, p. ix.) A
  picture of _La Belle Dame sans Merci_ in the Royal Academy for 1902
  seems to have been actually constructed on Mr Burke’s suggestions. For
  a very witty and crushing jest on _The Sublime and Beautiful_, _v.
  inf._, Bk. viii. ch. 3.

Footnote 321:

  This was not the opinion of some person who has annotated the copy of
  the _Essay on Taste_ (3rd ed., Edinburgh, 1780: the first appeared in
  1758) which belongs to the University of Edinburgh, as “wonderfully
  profound.” Other annotators, however, both of this and the _Essay on
  Genius_ (1774)—for the University authorities of the past appear to
  have been somewhat indifferent to the fashion in which students used
  books—do not agree with him. In plain truth both pieces are rather
  trying examples of that “saying an infinite deal of nothing” which is
  so common in philosophical inquiries. “Facility in the conception of
  an object, if it be moderate, gives us pleasure” (_Taste_, p. 29);
  “The rudest rocks and mountains ... acquire beauty when skilfully
  imitated in painting;” “Where refinement is wanting, taste must be
  coarse and vulgar” (p. 115). “Perfect criticism requires therefore”
  (p. 174) “the greatest philosophical acuteness united with the most
  exquisite perfection of taste.” “The different works of men of genius
  sometimes differ very much in the degree of their perfection”
  (_Genius_, p. 236). “Both in genius for the arts and in genius for
  science Imagination is assisted by Memory.” Certainly “here be
  truths,” but a continued course of reading things like them begins
  before long to inspire a considerable longing for falsehoods. Gerard,
  however, though habitually dull, is less absurd than Alison, whom he
  undoubtedly supplied with his principle of Association.

Footnote 322:

  Ed. cit. See a little farther on a similarly uncritical criticism on
  the _trahuntque siccas machinæ carinas_ of Horace.

Footnote 323:

  Ibid.

Footnote 324:

  The mother of Gwendolen Harleth was wiser. “Oh! my dear, any nose,”
  said she, “will do to be miserable with!” and if so, why not to be
  predatory? The only possible answer of course caps the absurdity. The
  conventional Bandit is an Italian; the conventional Italian has an
  aquiline nose: therefore, &c.

Footnote 325:

  Had all æstheticians approached their subject in the spirit of our
  English historian of it, much of what I have said would be quite
  inapplicable. “The æsthetic theorist,” says Mr Bosanquet in his
  _Preface_ (_History of Æsthetic_: London, 1892), “desires to
  understand the artist, not in order to interfere with the latter, but
  in order to satisfy an intellectual interest of his own.” With such an
  attitude I have no quarrel: nor, I should think, need those who take
  it have any quarrel with mine. I may add that from this point onwards
  I shall take the liberty of a perpetual silent reference to Mr
  Bosanquet’s treatment of subjects and parts of subjects which seem to
  me to lie outside of my own plan. I purposely abstained from reading
  his book until two-thirds of my own were published, and more than
  two-thirds more of the remainder were written. And I have been amused
  and pleased, though not surprised, to find that if we had planned the
  two books together from the first, we could hardly have covered the
  ground more completely and with less confusion. I cannot, however,
  help observing that Mr Bosanquet, like almost all æstheticians I know,
  except Signor Croce, though he does not neglect literature, at least
  devotes most attention to the plastic arts. This is perhaps a little
  significant.

Footnote 326:

  The Germans, I believe, have definitely ticketed these explorers as
  “The Antiquarians.”

Footnote 327:

  For this see in the last vol. under Dryden, Addison, Johnson, L.
  Racine, Voltaire, La Harpe, &c.: in the present the Zürichers and
  Chateaubriand.

Footnote 328:

  I may once more refer to Mr Nichol Smith’s valuable edition of the
  Prefaces to most of these. Mrs Montagu’s famous _Essay on the Writings
  and Genius of Shakespeare_ (London, 1769, and often reprinted) may
  expect a separate mention. It is well intentioned but rather feeble,
  much of it being pure _tu quoque_ to Voltaire, and sometimes extremely
  unjust on Corneille, and even Æschylus. It is not quite ignorant; but
  once more _non tali auxilio!_

Footnote 329:

  See vol. ii. p. 416.

Footnote 330:

  See the _Ode to the Queen_, 1706. Prior inserts a tenth line, and
  makes the seamless coat an awkwardly cobbled thing of quatrain,
  quatrain, couplet.

Footnote 331:

  See vol. ii. p. 481.

Footnote 332:

  To this context perhaps best belongs Thomas Hayward’s _British
  Muse_,[333] an anthology on the lines of Poole and Bysshe, published
  in 1738 and dedicated to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. [Sidenote: _T.
  Hayward._] The book has a preface of some length (which is said to be,
  like the dedication, the work not of the compiler but of Oldys[334]
  himself), criticising its predecessors (including Gildon) rather
  severely, and showing knowledge of English criticism generally; but
  the point of chief interest about the book is its own interest in, and
  extensive draughts from, Elizabethan Drama. Not merely “the divine and
  incomparable” Shakespeare, not merely the still popular sock and
  buskin of Ben Jonson and of Beaumont and Fletcher, but almost all the
  others, from Massinger and Middleton down to Goffe and Gomersall,
  receive attention, although, as he tells us, they were so hard to get
  that you had to give between three or four pounds for a volume
  containing some ten plays of Massinger. This is noteworthy; but that
  his zeal was not according to full knowledge is curiously shown by the
  contempt with which he speaks, not merely of Bodenham’s _Belvedere_,
  but of Allot’s _England’s Parnassus_, alleging “the little merit of
  the obsolete poets from which they were extracted.” Now it should be
  unnecessary to say that Allot drew, almost as largely as his early
  date permitted him, on “the divine and incomparable” himself, on
  Spenser, and on others only inferior to these. But this carping at
  forerunners is too common. If Oldys could write thus, what must have
  been the ignorance of others?

Footnote 333:

  3 vols., London.

Footnote 334:

  It thus connects the book with _The Muses’ Library_.

Footnote 335:

  Even before, at, or about the date of the _Reliques_ themselves, a
  good deal was being done—_e.g._, Capell’s well-known _Prolusions_,
  which gave as early as 1760 the real _Nut-Browne Maid_, Sackville’s
  _Induction, Edward III._, and Davies’ _Nosce Teipsum_, and the
  _Miscellaneous Pieces_ of 1764, supplying Marston’s _Poems_ and _The
  Troublesome Reign of King John._

Footnote 336:

  The most remarkable recent authority on this matter is of course M.
  Texte, who has appeared already and will appear again in his own
  place.

Footnote 337:

  I hold (though as probable rather than certain) that Richardson and
  Fielding knew _Marianne_ and _Le Paysan Parvenu_: but Marivaux frankly
  wrote _Le Spectateur Français_.

Footnote 338:

  Vol. ii. p. 545. Once more Tiraboschi must be reserved as a great
  early example of the historical treatment of a national literature.

Footnote 339:

  I include of course the Galician and Portuguese ballad-books.

Footnote 340:

  It was explained, and in manner I think not open to any but wilful
  misunderstanding, that among the branches of so-called, and not
  unjustly so-called, Criticism which were excluded from this History
  was the greater part of merely commentatorial “scholarship”—the
  editing and interpretative part of the scholarship of the Renaissance
  and the succeeding centuries. We were able, now and then, to admit
  critics of the class when, like Politian in part of his work earlier,
  or Bentley later, they came actually within our range. But classical
  scholarship has lain more and more out of our path as the eighteenth
  century proceeded, and it was not till far into the nineteenth, and
  then but for a moment, that the two converged. The greatest results of
  this convergence in England were given by Professors Sellar and
  Nettleship, the former in his admirable series of works on the Roman
  Poets, the latter in the essays referred to above, and by Mr Pater in
  his dealing with Plato and other Greeks. Professor Munro, the greatest
  light of the younger University, touched literature rather less than
  pure scholarship, and may perhaps be thought to have been least
  infallible when he touched the former nearest. I had fully perceived
  the necessity for this exclusion before the appearance of Dr Sandys'
  admirable _History of Classical Scholarship_; but that book, though it
  has not, at the time I write, reached our present period or even that
  of our last volume, will serve to do what I cannot do as much better
  than I could have done it on this count as Mr Bosanquet’s on the
  other.

Footnote 341:

  _Les définitions ne se posent pas à priori, si ce n’est peut-être en
  mathématique. En histoire, c’est de l'étude patiente de la réalité
  qu’elles se dégagent insensiblement._ Compare Mme. de Stael, _sup._,
  p. 108.

Footnote 342:

  It may be barely necessary to remind the reader once more that the
  _period_ of this accomplishment by no means synchronises in all cases.
  The “Dissolving of Neo-Classicism” takes in Germany scarcely more than
  fifty years at farthest—from 1725 to 1775 or thereabouts; in England
  about another quarter of a century, or till 1800 in round numbers; in
  France a good century—from 1730 to 1830. In Italy the solitary figure
  of Vico anticipates even the earliest of these dates, and originates
  vast alterations in what calls itself criticism; but they do not take
  effect for the time. The general state, both here and in Spain, is
  stationary.

Footnote 343:

  Père André probably seemed, to himself or others, to do this.

Footnote 344:

  This is where Hurd is so valuable.

Footnote 345:

  It is doubtful whether Hurd would have accepted it; it is certain that
  Lessing would not: and Diderot never quite reached the point of view
  at which it presented itself.

Footnote 346:

  Lessing’s attempt to confute the French _ex ore Aristotelis_ is
  extraordinarily effective _ad homines_, and most valuable now and then
  intrinsically. But it has the drawback of ignoring the fact that,
  though much in Shakespeare is justified by Aristotle, much can only be
  justified without him, and some must be justified in his teeth.

Footnote 347:

  See Index to vol. i.

Footnote 348:

  With, once more, the great exception and anticipation of Vico.

Footnote 349:

  It is widely usual in editions of Wordsworth to print these together
  and consecutively. They are so short, and accessible in so many
  different shapes that it seems superfluous to give page-references to
  any particular edition. The _Letter to a Friend of Robert Burns_
  (1816) (which Mr Rhys has included in the _Literary Pamphlets_ noticed
  elsewhere) is less purely literary, but has important passages,
  especially that on _Tam o’ Shanter_.

Footnote 350:

  I have had to insert “almost” since this chapter was first written, as
  a salute to my friend Professor Raleigh. The regular Wordsworthian is,
  of course, not an “impartial observer” at all. And I have generally
  found that the best of such observers, even if they do not agree with
  me, are disposed to admit that W. W. said more than he meant, and even
  to some extent what he did _not_ mean.

Footnote 351:

  That on the death of West.

Footnote 352:

  I have used, and refer to, the Bohn edition of Coleridge’s Prose
  Works.

Footnote 353:

  1800-1817.

Footnote 354:

  In practice, though not always in theory: for his famous explanation
  of his _Christabel_ metre is admitted, even by an authority who takes
  such different views of prosody from mine as Mr Robert Bridges, to be
  quite wrong.

Footnote 355:

  I have, since this was written, endeavoured to do something of the
  kind for a practical purpose (to which nothing is sacred) in my _Loci
  Critici_ (London and Boston, Mass., 1903), pp. 303-365.

Footnote 356:

  Or, as he puts it in one of the great critical phrases of the world,
  “to produce that willing _suspension of disbelief for the moment_
  which constitutes poetic faith.” It derives of course from Aristotle,
  but the advance on the original is immense.

Footnote 357:

  “And from all other species having this object in common with it, it
  is discriminated by proposing to itself such delight from the whole as
  is compatible with a distinct gratification from each component part.”
  This is the dialect of “Cimmerian Lodge” with a vengeance! An attempt
  to expound it will be found in the abstract of the _Lectures_ of 1811
  given by J. P. Collier: but it sheds little light. And simpler
  Estesian definitions elsewhere—“Prose is words in good order: poetry
  the best words in the best order,” &c.—labour likewise under the
  common curse that _Poetry_ escapes them. What better words in what
  better order than the Lord’s Prayer? Is that poetry?

Footnote 358:

  The extraordinary critical genius of Coleridge can hardly be better
  shown than by his gloss here on the Petronian enigma, _Præcipitandus
  est liber spiritus_, to which we have referred so often. The poet—the
  image is not Coleridge’s, but I think it very fairly illustrates his
  view—_rides_ the reader’s own genius, and both together attain the
  goal.

Footnote 359:

  This (chap. xvi., not long after the beginning (p. 157, ed. Bohn)) is
  the reference cited above, i. 419, note. It is very slight, and merely
  concerns Dante’s jealousy for his mother tongue.

Footnote 360:

  These terms are used with no offensive intention, but in strict
  reference to the matter of the poems.

Footnote 361:

  Chap. xx. _sub fin._, p. 201, ed. cit.

Footnote 362:

  Except, once more, to my friend Mr Raleigh.

Footnote 363:

  Chap. xxi. Personality, partisanship, haphazard, garbling, caricature
  in selection of instances, are the chief faults that Coleridge finds
  with both _Edinburgh_ and _Quarterly_. The reply is dignified in tone
  and not unjust; but, like other things of the same kind, it
  illustrates certain permanent weaknesses of human nature. All the
  faults, I think, which Coleridge finds with “Blue and Yellow” and
  “Buff” reviewing might be found with his own critique of Maturin’s
  _Bertram_, printed in this very volume. All these faults certainly
  found by every generation of authors with their critics, even when
  these authors happen to have been copious and constant writers of
  criticism themselves. Always is the author tempted, like Mr Baxter, to
  cry, “Ah, but _I_ was in the right, and these men are dreadfully in
  the wrong”; always does he think, like the Archbishop of Granada, that
  the incriminated part of his sermon is exactly the best part; always,
  when he bewails the absence of the just and impartial critics of other
  times, does he forget the wise ejaculation of Mr Rigmarole, “Pretty
  much like our own, I fancy!” (There is no mental reservation in these
  remarks.)

Footnote 364:

  Four-and-thirty closely printed pages in the Bohn ed.

Footnote 365:

  Vol. i. p. 436.

Footnote 366:

  Yet there are curious lapses even here. Take the extreme example,
  _Alice Fell_, of whom even her author was half-ashamed as mean and
  homely. How about “fierce career,” and “smitten with a startling
  sound,” and the inversion of “Proud creature was she”?

Footnote 367:

  My friend Prof. Raleigh, in his brilliant and (for that word hath
  something derogated) really critical study of Wordsworth (London,
  1903), is of a different opinion: but I hold my own. And I do not
  enter into controversy on the point, because I have nothing to add to
  the text, written before Prof. Raleigh’s book appeared.

Footnote 368:

  I am well acquainted with the glosses on this famous phrase.

Footnote 369:

  “Concluding” in strictness they are not; for Coleridge, in one of his
  whims, chose to transfer _Satyrane’s Letters_ from _The Friend_ to be
  a sort of _coda_ to the _Biographia_, tipped it with the rather
  brutish sting of the _Critique on Bertram_, and attempted _Versöhnung_
  with a mystical peroration. But the thing really and logically ends
  with the words “Betty Foy,” _sub fin._, chap. xxi.

Footnote 370:

  He somewhere sighs for Southey’s command of terse crisp sentences, and
  compares his own to “Surinam toads with young ones sprouting and
  hanging about them as they go.”

Footnote 371:

  An agreeable American critic, Miss Agnes Repplier, once remarked that
  Coleridge must have been “a very beatable child.” This beatability
  continued till his death: you can only worship him in the spirit of
  the Portuguese sailor towards his saints.

Footnote 372:

  Mrs General Baynes of the Honourable Mrs Boldero in _The Adventures of
  Philip_, chap. xx.

Footnote 373:

  Mr Dykes Campbell (whose threading of the maze and piecing of the ends
  of Coleridgiana is a standing marvel) thought, or seemed to think,
  that the Introduction grew into the _Biographia_ itself.

Footnote 374:

  _Satyrane’s Letters_ themselves contain a good deal of criticism in
  and out of the interview with Klopstock (p. 270 _sq._, ed. cit.),
  where the credit is claimed by some for Wordsworth. The _Critique on
  Bertram_ opens well on the “Don Juan” story, but the rest of it is not
  _muy hermosa cosa_, combining, as it does, that snarling and carping
  tone, against which Coleridge is always and justly protesting, with
  more than a suspicion of personal spite. For _Bertram_ had been
  preferred to _Zapolya_.

Footnote 375:

  The usually known reprint of the 2nd ed. of 1818 is very different
  from the original, published in the extraordinary fashion described by
  Coleridge himself in the _Biographia_, during 1809-10, and collected
  in volume form thereafter. This latter is perhaps the better worth
  reading. It is at any rate a confirmation of the at first sight
  immoral maxim that you should always buy a book you want, whether you
  can afford it or not. Twenty years ago it was not common but
  comparatively cheap; now, alas! it is both uncommon and very dear.

Footnote 376:

  The editor of these, the late Mr Thomas Ashe (author of a poem far too
  little read—_The Sorrows of Hypsipyle_), took much pains with them;
  and if he could have kept back a few flings, would have deserved
  unqualified thanks. “Never mind God’s will” may be noble counsel, or
  an unlucky advice to run worse than your head against worse than a
  stone wall. But it is certainly out of place in very brief and rare
  notes on a classical author.

Footnote 377:

  The question—a puzzle like other _Quæstiones Estesianæ_—about the
  exact numbers and dates of Coleridge’s Shakespearian courses is not
  for us. It is enough to say that our extant materials (consisting, in
  regard to some lectures, of notes and reports from several different
  sources) chiefly, if not wholly, concern two courses delivered in
  London (1811-12 and 1818), and one at Bristol, 1813-14. Of the Royal
  Institution Lectures of 1806-7, on which he relied (throwing them even
  farther back) to prove his priority to Schlegel, nothing at all,
  unluckily, is preserved. Indeed Mr Dykes Campbell insisted, and seems
  to have almost proved, that none at all were delivered till Jan. 1808.
  And of these we have only Crabb Robinson’s brief references.

Footnote 378:

  This perhaps should, and can very shortly, be demonstrated:—
  Observation may be either broad and sweeping, or minute and
  concentrated; Johnson specifies the former kind in the last half of
  the first line. Observation may be directed to men, to things, &c.; it
  is to mankind that he wishes it directed, and he says so in the first
  half of the second. Further, as this is too abstract, he gives the
  poetic and imaginative touch by filling in the waste atlas, with
  “China” and “Peru,” with the porcelain and the pigtails, the llamas
  and the gold associated with mankind in these countries. And in the
  name of Logic, and Rhetoric and Poetry into the bargain, “What for
  no?”

Footnote 379:

  P. 73, ed. cit. Goethe, of course, was of the same opinion.

Footnote 380:

  P. 89.

Footnote 381:

  P. 138.

Footnote 382:

  P. 139 _sq._

Footnote 383:

  _E.g._, p. 152 _sq._

Footnote 384:

  P. 207.

Footnote 385:

  P. 213.

Footnote 386:

  P. 441.

Footnote 387:

  P. 412.

Footnote 388:

  _E.g._, pp. 426, 427.

Footnote 389:

  All men who write for the periodical press must almost necessarily
  repeat themselves, and Hazlitt (whose work often comes to us directly
  from the press itself) is not so very much less peccant in this kind
  than Coleridge. Coleridge’s own method exposes the peccadillo
  ruthlessly. The “Let Observation” criticism occurs several times: the
  story about the Falls of Lanark and the man who, beginning with
  “majestic,” spoilt it by “very pretty,” over and over again. Nor is
  this repetition merely due to the chaotic state of his publications;
  it seems to have been a congenital bias, as testified to in his
  conversation quite early.

Footnote 390:

  P. 15, _ed. cit._

Footnote 391:

  _V. infra_ on _Letters_.

Footnote 392:

  P. 38.

Footnote 393:

  P. 45.

Footnote 394:

  P. 74.

Footnote 395:

  P. 97.

Footnote 396:

  P. 158. These were, “When the professions fell off from the Church;
  when literature fell off from the professions; and when the press fell
  off from literature.”

Footnote 397:

  P. 164 _sq._

Footnote 398:

  P. 177.

Footnote 399:

  P. 183.

Footnote 400:

  P. 201.

Footnote 401:

  P. 214.

Footnote 402:

  P. 174, _v. inf._

Footnote 403:

  Miscellanies, pp. 175-187 _ed. cit._

Footnote 404:

  It is odd, but useful, to remember Coleridge’s fancy for stating
  propositions algebraically. If his definition were true, _a_ = _b_ or
  even (_a_ + _b_)^2 = _a_^2 + 2_ab_ + _b_^2 would be style at its very
  acme (cf. Addison in _Spec._ 62 on Euclid and Wit).

Footnote 405:

  London, 1895.

Footnote 406:

  Pp. 4, 5, 30, 35, 59, 82, 88.

Footnote 407:

  P. 118 _sq._

Footnote 408:

  P. 121.

Footnote 409:

  P. 123.

Footnote 410:

  Pp. 127-130.

Footnote 411:

  P. 147. Cf. _sup._, p. 223.

Footnote 412:

  Coleridge quotes neither Quintilian nor Dante, and was probably not
  thinking of either. But _we_ think of them.

Footnote 413:

  P. 194.

Footnote 414:

  _I.e._, “The faculty which makes many into one”—the creative
  imagination. This form is much better than “es_em_plastic,” which
  Coleridge adopts in the _Biographia_, for there one stumbles over the
  second syllable, and supposes it to be the preposition ἐν.

Footnote 415:

  P. 258.

Footnote 416:

  Pp. 274, 275.

Footnote 417:

  P. 293.

Footnote 418:

  Ed. E. H. Coleridge, 2 vols., London, 1895.

Footnote 419:

  i. 97, _ed. cit._

Footnote 420:

  Miss Mary Evans, Miss Sarah Fricker, and an uncertainly
  Christian-named Miss Brunton. _More in excelsis Coleridgeano_ he,
  being engaged to No. 2 and desiring to marry No. 1, “hoped that he
  might be cured” by the “exquisite beauty and uncommon accomplishments”
  of No. 3. See a page or two (89) earlier.

Footnote 421:

  P. 157.

Footnote 422:

  P. 163.

Footnote 423:

  P. 181.

Footnote 424:

  P. 196.

Footnote 425:

  P. 210. This was just after the as yet hollow healing of the first
  great quarrel in 1796.

Footnote 426:

  P. 384. These passages are most important as showing how _early_
  Coleridge dissented from Wordsworth.

Footnote 427:

  P. 549.

Footnote 428:

  P. 557.

Footnote 429:

  P. 663.

Footnote 430:

  _V. infra_, chap. iii.

Footnote 431:

  _Coleridge_ (“English Men of Letters,” London, 1884), p. 156.

Footnote 432:

  Ibid., pp. 46, 47.

Footnote 433:

  See _Life and Correspondence_, ii. 316 _sq._ especially, for
  Coleridge’s magnificent “Spanish-Castlery” in connection.

Footnote 434:

  6 vols., London, 1850.

Footnote 435:

  4 vols., London, 1856. _The Letters to Caroline Bowles_ (London, 1881)
  are even fuller proportionately: and _Omniana_, the _Wesley_, the
  _Cowper_, _Espriella_, the _Colloquies_, with almost everything,
  contribute.

Footnote 436:

  But see a very curious glimpse of resipiscence in _Letters_, ii. 171
  _sq._

Footnote 437:

  The projected _Rhadamanthus_, a periodical on something like the lines
  of the later _Retrospective Review_, was a real loss.

Footnote 438:

  _Letters_, i. 69, and elsewhere, also, I think—_e.g., Life and Corr._,
  iv. 106. Wynn was evidently a precisian of Bysshism. For other
  noteworthy critical things in this collection, see i. 173 (Suggestion
  of Hist. Novels); ii. 91 (Crabbe); 214 (Engl. Hexameters); iii. (the
  various letters about English Hexameters); iv. 47, Sayers’ Poems. I
  give but few here, because the _Letters_ have an index. I wish these
  and my other references may prompt and help some one to examine, at
  greater length than would be possible or proper here, the literary
  opinions of the best-read man in England for some fifty years—
  1790-1840.

Footnote 439:

  It is unlucky that Guest’s _English Rhythms_ came too late in the
  evening of his day for him to carry out his expressed purpose of
  reviewing it. He evidently recognised its extraordinary value as a
  _Thesaurus_: and his summary of the earlier part as “worthless” is of
  course not deliberate or final, though it is a very natural expression
  in reference to Guest’s astonishing heresies on Shakespearian and
  Miltonic prosody. I know no one—not even Gray—who seems to have had,
  before the whole range of English verse was known, juster notions on
  the whole of English prosody. Even his wanderings after hexameters are
  not fatal.

Footnote 440:

  _The Doctor_ (1 vol., London, 1848), p. 18.

Footnote 441:

  P. 34.

Footnote 442:

  P. 42.

Footnote 443:

  P. 65.

Footnote 444:

  P. 86.

Footnote 445:

  P. 99.

Footnote 446:

  P. 194.

Footnote 447:

  P. 245. It is curious, by the way, that Southey bewails the absence in
  English of any synonym for the Spanish _desengaño_. That shows that
  “disillusionment,” one of those strictly analogous and justifiable
  neologisms which he rightly defends, had not then come into use.

Footnote 448:

  P. 315.

Footnote 449:

  P. 379.

Footnote 450:

  P. 476.

Footnote 451:

  P. 536.

Footnote 452:

  P. 610.

Footnote 453:

  Such an authority, for instance, as one of the reviewers of this poor
  book, who decided that “no man of critical genius” would have
  attempted to write it.

Footnote 454:

  Some readers may like a few out of hundreds of possible references to
  _Life and Corr._, which has no Index: i. 85 (Ariosto and Spenser); 122
  (Construction); 316-318 (Chapelain, before and after reading); ii. 197
  (Greek and Latin taste in poetry); 211, 212 (Modern Ballads); iii. 9
  (Archaisms and Neologisms); 140 (the Epistles in _Marmion_); 145 _sq._
  (Rhyme, &c.); 205 (the purple patch in _Kehama_); 213, 265 (Advice to
  E. Elliott); 277 (blank verse); 295 (Spenser); iv. 301, 338 (very
  interesting, on a prophesied return of “preciousness” and
  “metaphysical” style in poetry); v. 245 (a never-carried-out plan of
  continuing Warton); v. 99 (his own method of writing); vi. 93 (To
  Bowles—reasons for not reviewing poetry).

Footnote 455:

  The editions of Lamb in parts are now fortunately very numerous, and
  there are even several of the whole, some of which have been begun
  since the text was written. It is therefore superfluous to give pages,
  especially as the individual articles are almost always short. But I
  generally use the late R. H. Shepherd’s 1 vol. ed. of the _Works_
  (London, 1875), and Canon Ainger’s of the _Letters_ (London, 1888).

Footnote 456:

  _Table Talk_, pp. 313, 314, _ed. cit. inf._

Footnote 457:

  _Winterslow_, p. 463, _ed. cit. inf._

Footnote 458:

  Now, alas! become, between pen and press, the _late_ Master.

Footnote 459:

  _Letters_, ed. Ainger, i. 162 _sq._, with the most amusing additional
  letter in the Appendix, p. 328 _sq._, on the wrath of Wordsworth and
  Coleridge.

Footnote 460:

  Ibid., i. 189, 190.

Footnote 461:

  P. 207.

Footnote 462:

  P. 286 _sq._

Footnote 463:

  P. 290.

Footnote 464:

  Ibid., ii. 105.

Footnote 465:

  Even as the exquisite figure of Mrs Blake, sitting on the bedside,
  faces the sketches of gnashing fiends.

Footnote 466:

  P. 138.

Footnote 467:

  P. 278.

Footnote 468:

  There may be people who do not know this, and those who know it
  already need not read it. A college cook (I think of Brasenose) was
  particularly famous for that most excellent dish the _fondue_, but
  would never tell his recipe. At last some Arthur Pendennis (of the
  other shop) got round him to this extent: “Why, sir,” said he, “you
  see I takes the eggs, and the butter, and the cheese, you know, and
  the other things; _and then I just fondoos ’em_.”

Footnote 469:

  There is no complete ed. of Hunt, and there could not well be one. I
  shall refer here to the 7 vols. of Messrs. Smith & Elder’s cheap and
  uniform reprint of a good deal, and to the pretty American pocket
  issue of the _Italian Poets_.

Footnote 470:

  At the beginning of the Essay on Restoration Drama.

Footnote 471:

  Italian.

Footnote 472:

  Of course it is not all unfavourable: Leigh Hunt is far too much of a
  critic and a lover of poetry for that. But he is constantly put off
  and put out by Dante’s “bigotry,” his “uncharitableness,” the
  “barbarous pedantries” of his age, and the like.

Footnote 473:

  New ed., _ut sup._: London, 1883.

Footnote 474:

  This is good, but not so good: and elsewhere—though critical matter
  will be found in all Hunt’s collected books and in all his uncollected
  periodical work, from the _Examiner_, “whose very name is Hunt,” and
  the _Indicator_, and the _Reflector_, to the _Tatler_, and the _London
  Journal_—we shall never find him better and seldom so good.

Footnote 475:

  P. 51, _ed. cit._

Footnote 476:

  It is curious what power that dead sorceress has had on almost all her
  poets.

Footnote 477:

  P. 250, _ed. cit._

Footnote 478:

  Preference only, of course: the exceptions are numerous, but not
  enough to destroy the rule.

Footnote 479:

  References will be made here throughout to the reprints of Hazlitt’s
  literary work in the Bohn Library, 7 vols. This is to _The English
  Comic Writers_, p. 33. The newer and completer edition of Messrs
  Waller & Glover had but begun when the text was written.

Footnote 480:

  Ibid., p. 170 _sq._, and p. 176 _sq._

Footnote 481:

  He is, however, dangerously near requiring it with regard to Scott
  (see the end of the article on him in _The Spirit of his Age_), and
  whenever he speaks of the Duke of Wellington.

Footnote 482:

  _English Poets_, ed. cit., pp. 92-95.

Footnote 483:

  Pp. 18-25.

Footnote 484:

  This favourite word of his has been adopted by all competent critics
  as best describing his own manner.

Footnote 485:

  Pp. 19, 20.

Footnote 486:

  The last page of _The English Poets_.

Footnote 487:

  It is curious that the critic’s blunder had been anticipated, though
  not excused, by the author’s. Richardson of course _meant_ to make
  Lovelace what Hazlitt sees in him: only he failed.

Footnote 488:

  In the paper on Sir Philip’s _Sonnets_, noted above.

Footnote 489:

  Lect. vi., p. 201 _sq._

Footnote 490:

  But not as unique as odd.

Footnote 491:

  P. 181.

Footnote 492:

  Pp. 115, 126. The elaborate characters of Bacon, &c., in this course
  should be compared with those of Pope, and others earlier.

Footnote 493:

  P. 64, ed. cit.

Footnote 494:

  P. 75.

Footnote 495:

  P. 108.

Footnote 496:

  P. 77.

Footnote 497:

  P. 139.

Footnote 498:

  P. 185.

Footnote 499:

  P. 278. These passages may remind some of the story of one of George
  Sand’s old lovers pausing before a photograph of her in a shop-window,
  and saying to his companion, “Et je l’ai connue _belle_!”

Footnote 500:

  P. 344.

Footnote 501:

  The usual dog-metaphors are no triviality in regard to Hazlitt when he
  is in this mood. Every one who knows dogs must have noticed the way in
  which they often snarl, as if they could not help it; the growl and
  gnash are forced from them.

Footnote 502:

  P. 441.

Footnote 503:

  P. 449.

Footnote 504:

  The end-note of this piece coincides curiously with a remark once made
  to me by a person unusually well acquainted with France but, I feel
  sure, quite unaware that he was echoing Hazlitt. “The Frenchman has a
  certain routine of phrases into which his ideas run habitually as into
  a mould; and you cannot get him out of them.”

Footnote 505:

  P. 56.

Footnote 506:

  P. 203.

Footnote 507:

  Yet Hazlitt cannot resist a renewed fling at Sidney.

Footnote 508:

  P. 351.

Footnote 509:

  P. 150, ed. cit. I wish that some one, in these excerpting days, would
  extract and print together _all_ Hazlitt’s passages on Burke, Scott,
  and Coleridge.

Footnote 510:

  P. 246.

Footnote 511:

  P. 248.

Footnote 512:

  P. 317.

Footnote 513:

  P. 431.

Footnote 514:

  “We have more faith in a well-written romance than in common history.”

Footnote 515:

  In 1845, reviewing Horne’s very rashly entitled _New Spirit of the
  Age_. The review will be found in the 13th vol. (1886) of the ordinary
  ed. of Thackeray’s _Works_.

Footnote 516:

  P. 173.

Footnote 517:

  “Its strength is in its wings” is, in idea, of course, as old as
  Plato. But the nearest expression of it, the “la lyre est un
  instrument _ailé_” of Joubert, though by a man more than thirty years
  Hazlitt’s senior, was never, I think, published till ten years after
  Hazlitt’s death.

Footnote 518:

  Below Hazlitt (who as well as Lamb praised him, though the former
  _more suo_ fell foul of him as well) may be best placed, in the note
  which is as much as he deserves, that much-written-of “curiosity of
  literature,” the poisoner, connoisseur, and coxcomb, Wainewright.
  “Janus,” however, was too much occupied with pictures, plays,
  bric-à-brac, Montepulciano, veal-pies in red earthenware dishes, the
  prize-ring, and other fancies or fopperies, to busy himself directly
  with literature, save, perhaps, in the curious paper “Janus
  Weatherbound,” which seems to have been _his_ “farewell to
  essay-writing.” It is, however, fair to say that, odious as he was in
  ways not merely moral, he had something of “a taste” here also. His
  quotations, which are numerous, are singularly well selected; he
  admired not merely Fouqué but Shelley long before it was the fashion
  to do so; and you may pick out of the works, rather probably than
  certainly his (_Essays and Criticisms_, by T. G. Wainewright, ed. W.
  C. Hazlitt: London, 1880), stray literary notes not without value.

Footnote 519:

  I use for Blake Gilchrist’s _Life and Works_ (2nd ed., 2 vol., London,
  1880), Mr Swinburne’s _William Blake_ (London, 1868), Mr Rossetti’s
  Aldine _Poetical Works_ (London, 1874), and Messrs Ellis and Yeats’s
  great Blakian Thesaurus (3 vols., London, 1893).

Footnote 520:

  _V. sup._, ii. 391 note.

Footnote 521:

  Letter to the _Monthly Magazine_ of July 1, 1806. “O Englishmen! know
  that every man ought to be a judge of pictures, and every man is so
  who has not been connoisseured out of his senses.” The whole letter is
  given by Mr Swinburne, pp. 62, 63, _op. cit._

Footnote 522:

  In _The Marriage of Heaven and Hell_. Compare with this Vico’s famous
  doctrine that “the criterion on truth is to have _made_ it.”

Footnote 523:

  Facsimiled in Ellis and Yeats, vol. iii. Printed as _Sibylline Leaves_
  in Gilchrist, ii. 178, 180.

Footnote 524:

  See in particular his admirable review of Godwin’s _Chaucer_, and his
  just condemnation of the absurd practice—simply wallowed in since by
  biographers and historians—of bolstering out a book with what the
  subject _might have_ seen, done, thought, or suffered.

Footnote 525:

  The two qualities lauded above—knowledge and judgment—are specially
  noteworthy here, when we compare the article, not merely with the less
  fully informed work of Hurd, Percy, and Warton (not to say Ritson),
  but with more recent compositions by persons who had the originals
  easily at disposal.

Footnote 526:

  They will also be found printed together in the two vols. of
  _Biographies_, of which they form the larger part.

Footnote 527:

  _Periodical Criticism_, vol. ii.

Footnote 528:

   In connection with Sir Walter, one may pay a note of tribute to the
  extreme and now too little known critical ability of his “discoverer,”
  J. L. Adolphus, whose _Letters to Heber on the Authorship of Waverley_
  would come in well as an excursus-subject. Examining, as he did,
  certain known works of an at least hypothetically unknown writer, he
  was bound to give that attention to the _work itself_, which was the
  great thing necessary; and he gave it with remarkable ability,
  craftsmanship, and knowledge of literature.

Footnote 529:

  Those who will not take the trouble to search the _Specimens_
  themselves will find copious and admirably selected examples in
  Jeffrey’s article on the book (_Essays_, 1 vol. ed., p. 359 _sq._),
  one of the best reviews he ever wrote, but for some superfluous,
  unjust, and, in the context (_v._ above), specially ungenerous flings
  at Southey.

Footnote 530:

  This may be found not merely in the edd. of the _Works_, but in Prof.
  Vaughan’s interesting selection of _Literary Criticism_ (London,
  1896).

Footnote 531:

  It is with some misgiving, and after more than one change of mind,
  that I place Shelley’s great poetical twin (or rather tally) in a note
  only here. I have already more than once referred (ii. 280, 412) to
  Keats’s perhaps one-sided but very vigorous and remarkable
  verse-formulation of the protest against Neo-classicism; the two
  prefaces (especially the final one) to _Endymion_ have been generally
  recognised by the competent as perhaps the most astonishingly just
  judgments which any poet has ever passed on himself: and the _Letters_
  are full of critical or quasi-critical passages of the highest
  interest. I myself have a sheaf of them duly noted; and some persons
  of distinction whom I know would admit them to the very Golden Book of
  Criticism. I hope, however, that my own judgment is not too much
  sicklied o’er with crotchet in holding that Keats’s criticism of
  himself and others is somewhat too spontaneous and automatic, somewhat
  too much of a mere other phase of his creation, to deserve the name of
  criticism properly so-called. He speaks of Shakespeare admirably,
  because he has the same quintessentially English cast of poetry that
  Shakespeare had. When he speaks of poetry in the abstract, as he does
  admirably and often, it is this poetry speaking of herself, and
  therefore speaking truly but not critically. Even in the wonderful
  remark (vol. v. p. 111., ed. Forman, Glasgow, 1901) on himself and
  Byron, “He describes what he sees: I describe what I imagine” (where
  he repeats Philostratus without in the least knowing it), the thing is
  not criticism: it is self-speaking. And beyond this he seldom goes,
  and is seldomer happy in his rare excursions. He might have become a
  critic, as he might have become almost anything good; but I do not
  think he was one.

Footnote 532:

  My copy is the eight-volume ed. of 1874-76: but the titles of the
  various pieces will enable them to be found in others.

Footnote 533:

  See the opening of “Southey and Porson.” It is, of course, not
  improved by the presence of the Landorian irony, which is an uncertain
  quality, too often inclining either to horse-play or to peevishness:
  but this is not fatal.

Footnote 534:

  See “Landor and Delille.”

Footnote 535:

  _V. sup._, p. 66 _sq._

Footnote 536:

  _V. sup._, ii. 491.

Footnote 537:

  From 1801, when his edition appeared, till well into the ’Twenties.
  Mr. Rhys (_op. cit. sup._) has given some of Bowles’s rejoinders to
  Byron, with Byron’s own _Letter_, mentioned below, and some references
  to the battle in his _Introduction_.

Footnote 538:

  They will be found usefully rearranged by himself in the extract of
  his answer to Byron given by Mr Rhys (Appendix to vol. ii., _op.
  cit._)

Footnote 539:

  i. 262 _sq._

Footnote 540:

  1821. To be found, outside the edd. of the author, in Mr Rhys’ book,
  ii. 162 _sq._

Footnote 541:

  It has been suggested to me that Byron ought to have the benefit, as
  well as the disadvantage, of my description of Keats’s critical
  utterances on the other side, as a phase of his creation. There is
  something in this: but Byron seems to me less _genuine_ even on this
  showing.

Footnote 542:

  The _Censura_, extending to 10 vols., but oftenest found incomplete,
  appeared in 1805-9. The _British Bibliographer_, _Restituta_, &c.,
  came later.

Footnote 543:

  First Series, 14 vols., 1820-26; Second, 2 vols., 1827-28. Its
  contributors included Hartley Coleridge, Talfourd (one of the persons
  whom I regretfully exclude here), and (in his earliest work) Thomas
  Wright.

Footnote 544:

  Southern afterwards came in contact with Borrow at Madrid. See _The
  Bible in Spain_ and Dr Knapp’s _Life_.

Footnote 545:

  There is none in the dates, but the title-page is different, the
  former vignette of a gateway (Trinity? “I cannot tell, I am an Oxford
  man”) disappearing, and being replaced by the editors’ names.

Footnote 546:

  A so-called “_Third_ Series” (in 2 vols., 1854) can hardly be
  considered as really forming part of the original, from which it is
  separated by a thirty years’ interval.

Footnote 547:

  It is the only adequate thing on him that I know.

Footnote 548:

  Specially good are, in vol. iv., the dramatic papers; in v., one on
  _Witchcraft_; in vi., those on Coryat and Sir T. Urquhart; in vii., on
  Donne and Ariosto; in ix., on Chaucer (continued later); in x., on
  _Minor French Poetry_ (Dorat); in xii., on _Latin Plays at Cambridge_,
  and one of singular and wide-reaching merit on the _Roman Comique_; in
  xv., an interesting tracing of Scott’s quotations in the novels; in
  xvi., an admirable paper on Shadwell. But there is practically nothing
  negligible: and good taste, good manners, good temper, and good
  learning abound throughout.

Footnote 549:

  _V. sup._, ii. 534.

Footnote 550:

  His best _literary_ skit, “Bozzy and Piozzi,” deals with the _Tour_,
  not the _Life_.

Footnote 551:

  The earlier _Rolliad_ is partly, but less, literary. For more on most
  of these I may refer to an essay of mine, _Twenty Years of Political
  Satire_, which originally appeared in _Macmillan’s Magazine_, and it
  reprinted in _Essays in English Literature_, 2nd series, London, 1895.

Footnote 552:

  I do not think it necessary to give Gifford’s prose or periodical
  criticism a separate place. It is by no means easily separable as
  such; and if separated I fancy there would be very little to say for
  it, and that what would have to be said against it is better summed up
  in the words of no less a political sympathiser and personal friend
  than Scott. A “cankered carle” cannot be a good critic, any more than
  a mildewed grape can give good wine. But Gifford was not quite so bad
  as he has seemed to some; and his editorial work, especially on
  Jonson, deserves almost the highest praise.

Footnote 553:

  I know, of course, that even Coleridge spoke unadvisedly about these
  immortal flowers. But he had got a “philosophical” craze at the
  moment: and he did not call them “stuff.”

Footnote 554:

  _Contributions to the Edinburgh Review_, London, pp. 36-63 of this the
  one vol. ed., 1853. The “Beauty” itself requires very little notice.
  It is an ingenious variation upon Alison, whose book it reviews,
  praises, and supports, with some unfairness to Gerard. But it
  abstains, almost comically and not uninstructively to an impartial
  thinker on æsthetics, from any definite literary applications.

Footnote 555:

  He makes indeed an awkward slip by linking Machiavel as a contemporary
  with Shakespeare, Bacon, Montaigne, and Galileo; but it is only
  recently, if even recently, that literary history has been carefully
  attended to, and Coleridge himself makes slips quite as bad.

Footnote 556:

  How much of this was got from his author herself I leave to others to
  decide. A comparison with what has been said of her _supra_ may be
  “for thoughts.”

Footnote 557:

  A fuller development of view about Jeffrey as a critic may be found in
  the present writer’s _Essays in English Literature_, First Series, pp.
  100-134. Articles of his own specially worth examining are, besides
  the “Staël,” “Cowper,” “Ford,” “Keats,” and “Campbell’s _Specimens_,”
  those on _W. Meister_ (very curious and interesting), Richardson,
  Scott, and Byron (very numerous and full of piquancies), Crabbe,
  Wordsworth of course (though with as much wisdom as good feeling he
  kept much of the most offensive matter both on Wordsworth and Southey
  out), and Burns. In regard to the latter I cannot help thinking that
  he played the _Advocatus Diaboli_ better than either Mr Arnold, Mr
  Shairp, or my late friend Mr Henley.

Footnote 558:

  The popularity, in late years, of the singularly uncritical words
  “sympathetic” and “unsympathetic” in describing Criticism, would of
  itself point to this necessity. It would seem impossible for a large
  number of persons to “like” otherwise than “grossly” in Dryden’s
  sense, or to imagine that any one else can like delicately, with
  discrimination, in the old sense “nicely.” A “sympathetic” notice or
  criticism is one which pours unmixed cataracts of what the cooks call
  oiled butter all over the patient: a notice that questions this part
  of him, rejects that, but gives due value to the gold and the silver
  and the precious stones, while discarding the hay and the stubble, is
  “unsympathetic.” Many years (many lustres even, alas!) ago, an old
  friend and colleague of mine, since distinguished in his own country
  as a critic, M. Paul Stapfer, complained that Englishmen, and still
  more Englishwomen, had only two critical categories—the “dry” and the
  “pretty.” These were unsatisfactory enough, but I think they were
  better than “sympathetic” and “unsympathetic” as now often used.

Footnote 559:

  P. 5, in the convenient 1-vol. reprint of Messrs Ward and Lock
  (London: n. d.)

Footnote 560:

  On the same page, ed. cit.

Footnote 561:

  Who loved the Vulgate.

Footnote 562:

  I decline to sully these pages with it: let it go to its own place,
  buckled neck and heels with Rapin’s on Nausicaa.

Footnote 563:

  We could abandon Owen Felltham to him with more equanimity if he did
  not describe, as “vile English, or properly no English,” such words as
  “nested,” “parallel” as a verb, and “uncurtain,” all excellent English
  of the best brand and vintage, formed on the strictest and most
  idiomatic patents of analogy. There is still far too much criticastry
  and pedanticulism (here’s for them!) of this kind about, and men like
  Hallam are very mainly responsible for it. Even “obnubilate,” to which
  he also objects, is a perfectly good word, on all-fours with
  “compensate,” which he himself uses in the same context, though less
  usual. A sovereign of just weight, fineness, and stamp is none the
  worse for having been little circulated: nor is a word.

Footnote 564:

  I can only think of one important blunder that he makes _as a
  historian_—the statement that Opitz “took Holland for his Parnassus.”
  Now Ronsard (_v. sup._, ii. 362) was not exactly a Dutchman.

Footnote 565:

  His _Critiques et Études Littéraires_ (2 vols., Paris, 1857) contain
  many things upon which I should like to dwell, especially his
  discussion, in the _Globe_, of the _État de la Poésie Française_ in
  1825. It is as good an expression of the views of the earlier, cooler,
  and more erudite Eclectic-Romantics as could be wished.

Footnote 566:

  To be found in his _Essais Historiques et Littéraires_: Paris, 1862.
  The _Essais Philosophiques et Littéraires_ (Paris, 1875) may also be
  consulted: but, as the double titles may warn the wary, there is not
  much pure literature in either.

Footnote 567:

  See the later _Conversations_, _passim_.

Footnote 568:

  This, with Quintus Smyrnæus as make-weight, is a sort of wreckage or
  recovery from the lectures which were howled down at the Collége de
  France by anti-Imperialist students. It is the largest of its author’s
  classical studies: not perhaps the most interesting. The French
  professorial method, possibly in direct tradition from the time when
  authors were really (and in some cases almost merely) _read_ to
  students, seems to include a very large amount of simple abstract and
  “argument.” (“Priam conducts the young princess to the Palace: he
  honours her,” &c.) This is, from our point of view, rather surplusage,
  and at any rate more important on Quintus Smyrnæus than on Virgil. But
  we may note a reference (p. 73) to Mr Arnold’s _Preface_, then pretty
  new, which is an interesting thing.

Footnote 569:

  There is naturally not much criticism here except the remark—in itself
  involving one of the few great commandments of criticism and one of
  the most frequently neglected—“il n’avait pas assez _lu_.”

Footnote 570:

  In the case of a man who wrote so much and so often on the same things
  as Sainte-Beuve, an exhaustive general index would be a great
  assistance. There is a whole volume of _Table_ to the _Causeries_,
  properly so called, the _Portraits de Femmes_, and the _Portraits
  Littéraires_; while the _Premiers Lundis_ contains a succinct but very
  useful synopsis-index of all the works and substantive pieces, and
  _Port-Royal_ has an elaborate index of its own. But my copies of the
  _Portraits Contemporains_ (5 vols.) and the _Chateaubriand_ (2), as
  well as the 13 of the _Nouveaux Lundis_, are indexless.

Footnote 571:

  Sainte-Beuve _could_ be dull, and his Senate speeches are most painful
  proofs of it. We know that the Senators who talked him inaudible had
  other reasons for their rudeness: but he almost provoked it apart from
  those reasons.

Footnote 572:

  I know Balzac’s criticism, which is extensive, pretty well: but I
  shall do no such despite to his genius as to allow him to appear here
  in a character where he showed no genius at all.

Footnote 573:

  Paris, 1828, and since.

Footnote 574:

  This, however (5 vols., 1832-39), was probably the first collection
  that definitely announced its author to the world at large.

Footnote 575:

  The first reissue (1844 ?) was only in two.

Footnote 576:

  This is a crucial example. Sainte-Beuve had a just reverence for the
  powers of this Abdiel-Michael of aristocracy. He even seems a little
  daunted and dazzled by their sombre splendour. But he does not bring
  out their literary _quality_ as he would have done later.

Footnote 577:

  I believe this charming book—made accessible for a time by the
  Brussels reprint of 1868—is again very rare. I once had the pleasure
  of introducing it to the late Lord Houghton, who told me afterwards
  that he had bought it “and dressed it up all in moons and stars.”

Footnote 578:

  Vigny (in a passage which Sainte-Beuve himself quotes with singular
  blindness or singular boldness) puts the thing finally: _Il ne faut
  disséquer que les morts: cette manière de chercher à ouvrir le cerveau
  d’un vivant est fausse et mauvaise_ (A. de. V.'s _Journal_, quoted in
  _Port. Contemp._, final ed., ii. 79).

Footnote 579:

  And, after all, let us remember that, on the testimony of the
  Goncourts (_Journal_, ii. 123), who have left some of the most
  offensive things against Sainte-Beuve, the critic, as late as 1863,
  rebuked Taine for belittling Hugo, in these memorable words, “Ne
  parlez pas d’Hugo. Vous ne le connaissez pas. Mais l'œuvre d’Hugo est
  magnifique!”

Footnote 580:

  See for instance the opening (1832) of the “Lamartine” (i. 276).

Footnote 581:

  _E.g._, to Crabbe, pp. 328-330; to Wordsworth and Coleridge, pp.
  337-345. Sainte-Beuve, it is hardly necessary to say, was English of
  the quarter-blood.

Footnote 582:

  The not quite “single speech” Ulric of that unforgettable piece, “Ils
  ont dit, L’amour passe et sa flamme est rapide.”

Footnote 583:

  This contains the admirable, if in more than one sense generous,
  judgment of Schlegel (Wilhelm), that he _a eu l'œil à toutes les
  grandes choses littéraires, s’il n’a pas toujour rendu justice aux
  moyennes_. Omit _grandes_ in the first clause; substitute it for
  _moyennes_ and prefix _pleine_ to _justice_ in the second; and the
  thing becomes a fair verdict on Sainte-Beuve himself.

Footnote 584:

  One of Sainte-Beuve’s defects (“for the man was mortal”) was an
  insufficient appreciation of the grotesque and the out-of-the-way.

Footnote 585:

  He himself put it earlier—at 1840 or thereabouts. No doubt, as I have
  said above, the essays of the ’Forties as a whole do show a great
  advance. But I hardly recognise the full Sainte-Beuve before, say, the
  “Daunou” and the “Leopardi” of 1844.

Footnote 586:

  The definitive edition was published in 1867-71 (the author died
  midway in 1869), in 7 vols.—6 of text, the first 5 of which average
  600 pp. each, 1 of elaborate index, by that admirable student of the
  older French literature, M. de Montaiglon. The original dates of
  publication were 1840-60.

Footnote 587:

  Unless we group with it Hazlitt’s, which is, in this instance, for
  thoughts. Your pure man of letters often has a morbid love of mere
  _force_.

Footnote 588:

  The touch of we do not quite know what personal soreness breaks in
  whenever “René” is mentioned, even much later than this.

Footnote 589:

  I fear that terrible charge, “il n'était pas gentilhomme,” is a little
  borne out by his intromitting with Chateaubriand’s annotated copy of
  the _Essai sur les Révolutions_, which he uses to fix anti-religious
  and anti-monarchical opinions on the writer. You have no business, at
  any rate till centuries have passed, with a man’s private comment on
  his published writings. It is mere eavesdropping once removed.

Footnote 590:

  i. 91.

Footnote 591:

  i. 132.

Footnote 592:

  _Ch. et s. G._, i. 233, 234.

Footnote 593:

  ii. 37.

Footnote 594:

  ii. 91.

Footnote 595:

  Ibid., 97.

Footnote 596:

  Ibid., 114.

Footnote 597:

  Ibid., 340.

Footnote 598:

  The _Constitutionnel_ first, then the _Moniteur_. Here, as elsewhere,
  I do not burden the text with details which are in all the
  biographical dictionaries.

Footnote 599:

  I wonder whether Mr Arnold got “Stagirius” from Sainte-Beuve, or
  direct from Saint-Marc Girardin, who seems to have extracted him
  originally from the Golden-mouth? So, too, did _Sohrab and Rustum_
  come from the “Firdousi” article? These interesting suggestions of
  suggestion—as interesting as the ordinary plagiarism and
  parallel-passage inquiries of bad and dull critics, are dull and bad—
  occur with Sainte-Beuve more often than with almost any man.

Footnote 600:

  The adventure was kept up, so far as I remember, for four subsequent
  years with equal punctuality. The Chapel, in Criticism of Our Lady of
  the Broken Lances has never seen such a paladin.

Footnote 601:

  The same applies to the protest, interesting as a _cri du cœur_ and a
  statement of life-purpose, but mistaken, against Taxile Delord (xi.
  400-403). The punishment too much dignifies the offence—and the
  offender.

Footnote 602:

  There is rhetoric enough in Gibbon, of course; but it is not the
  rhetoric that the French love.

Footnote 603:

  Sainte-Beuve’s fancy for Feydeau was a subject of wonder to friends of
  his who were not in the least prudish. It waned, however, and the
  signs of the waning are the subject of an anecdote, slightly too
  Rabelaisian to quote here, but very amusing.

Footnote 604:

  He himself has said truly and nobly of one of the few who _did_ escape
  them—Gautier: “Jamais un sentiment mauvais, soit de hauteur soit de
  jalousie mesquine, n’est entre dans [son] âme.” To be thus is to be
  one of ten thousand: even to kick the bad thoughts out when they
  present themselves is no common merit (_N. L._, vi. 325).

Footnote 605:

  Rather tantalisingly as to the _number_ of fulfilments. But the papers
  on the Greek Anthology in vol. vii. are exquisite in _quality_.

Footnote 606:

  I do not forget either Mr Arnold or Mr Pater: but they look at
  antiquity in a different way.

Footnote 607:

  The _Lundis_ (though that is not their fault) have perhaps given a
  rather terrible amount of “knowledge which is not knowledge” at second
  hand or further. I have often smiled at seeing some honest, if not
  consummate, first-hand study of a subject loftily pooh-poohed, by some
  one who evidently knew nothing of it but what he had learnt from
  Sainte-Beuve.

Footnote 608:

  Longinus, c. xxxv. _sub. fin._

Footnote 609:

  He was Professor of it for years; he was a constant contributor to the
  _Deux Mondes_; he welcomed the new study of Old French, and took early
  part in it. But if any reader wants any more from me on him I must
  refer to “A Paradox on Quinet” in my _Miscellaneous Essays_ (London,
  1892), p. 274 _sq._; on Michelet, to an article in the _Encyclopædia
  Britannica_.

Footnote 610:

  Edd. so numerous that reference to particular ones would be very
  little helpful: the original dates of important works will be
  specified.

Footnote 611:

  1864.

Footnote 612:

  1827.

Footnote 613:

  1828.

Footnote 614:

  1834.

Footnote 615:

  There is a very curious and interesting half-palinode,
  half-explanation, as to “art-for-art” here, which is worth noting.

Footnote 616:

  _V. sup._, i. 272, note.

Footnote 617:

  Paris, 1894.

Footnote 618:

  Paris, 1891.

Footnote 619:

  Begun in 1844, finished in 1861, and often reprinted.

Footnote 620:

  In his later days, too, the very disgust at being himself kept from
  producing literature kept him from dealing with it, and threw him upon
  the theatrical and artistic subjects in which he had indeed a great,
  but only a secondary, interest.

Footnote 621:

  There are some very noteworthy things in the early articles recovered
  and reprinted posthumously in _Fusains et Eaux-Fortes_ (Paris: 1890).

Footnote 622:

  Vol. i. p. 19.

Footnote 623:

  But never, I think, _without_ date—a blessing for which one cannot be
  too truly thankful to M. Du Camp or somebody else.

Footnote 624:

  He seems to have _canonised_ himself: his godfathers and godmothers
  had been contented to call him Marc.

Footnote 625:

  The _Cours_, in 5 vols. (afterwards 4), (Paris, 1843 _sq._); the
  _Essais_, in 2 (Paris, 1845).

Footnote 626:

  It is fair to say that Sainte-Beuve’s references to him are not quite
  trustworthy. There was probably some jealously.

Footnote 627:

  As Claude Vignon in _Béatrix_.

Footnote 628:

  Part of his collected work deals with Art. The rest—_Portraits
  Littéraires_ (1836-49), _Nouveaux Portraits Littéraires_ (1854), and
  _Études sur l'École Français_, (1855)—are out of print. The copies I
  _possess_ consist of _Portraits Littéraires_, 2 vols. (Paris, 1854),
  and _Nouveaux P. L._, 2 vols., 1855.

Footnote 629:

  _P. L._, i. 112-181, and _N. P. L._, i. 193-353, consist of Hugo
  articles.

Footnote 630:

  See _N. P. L._, ii. 67 _sq._

Footnote 631:

  Who has _P. L._, i. 81-112, and _N. P. L._, i. 45-193.

Footnote 632:

  “Ce serait plus simple d'écrire en Grec.”

Footnote 633:

  _P. L._, i. 325-367.

Footnote 634:

  Paris, 1838.

Footnote 635:

  2 vols., Paris, 1843.

Footnote 636:

  Paris, 1845.

Footnote 637:

  If any one is inclined—as some may be—to apply to this book Mérimée’s
  own censure of Ticknor and other literary historians for putting
  things in merely because they have read them, let me simply quote here
  the names of Henri de Latouche, of Fiorentino, and of Ozanam, to which
  I could add many others.

Footnote 638:

  In the Introduction to _Lettres à une autre Inconnue_ (Paris, 1875),
  p. xlv.

Footnote 639:

  Third ed., Paris, 1876.

Footnote 640:

  Ibid., 1874.

Footnote 641:

  In the _Portraits_.

Footnote 642:

  In the _Mélanges_.

Footnote 643:

  Also in the _Portraits_, where the shorter paper on Nodier has some
  excellent criticism.

Footnote 644:

  Rather oddly pitchforked into the _Carmen_ volume; the others are in
  the _Portraits_.

Footnote 645:

  _Schriften_, ed. Roth, 8 vols. in 9: Berlin, 1821-42. The second part
  of the eighth volume is wholly occupied by one of the best indices
  that I know in any German book—a very special blessing in the case of
  a writer like Hamann.

Footnote 646:

  i. 509.

Footnote 647:

  ii. 376-413.

Footnote 648:

  iii. 81.

Footnote 649:

  Who is mentioned in the same passage for his discourse on _Fables_.

Footnote 650:

  He speaks, for instance (ii. 437, saying, of course, that he will
  _not_ speak), of “our æsthetic” as “Bohemian glass”; of the “falsity
  of its subtlety,” &c.

Footnote 651:

  He describes himself in a letter to Reichardt, of June 1777 (v. 248),
  as spending the livelong day in reading “the Greek Testament, some
  classic, or _Shakespeare_.” Fifteen years earlier, in one of the
  maddest-looking of his tract-groups (_Essais à Mosaïque_, vol. ii.),
  written in French and giving itself out as written in England, “at
  Bedlam,” “Tyburn Road,” &c., he had pronounced Falstaff “unique”: and
  his quotations from _Hamlet_, at a time when the future author of
  _Wilhelm Meister_ was scarcely breeched, are frequent.

Footnote 652:

  9 vols.: Göttingen, 1844-47.

Footnote 653:

  v. 93.

Footnote 654:

  v. 331.

Footnote 655:

  In vols. i. and ii.

Footnote 656:

  ii. 383.

Footnote 657:

  i. 283 _sq._ He is very interesting here to compare and contrast with
  Goethe.

Footnote 658:

  i.-xx. of the 60-vol. ed. (Stuttgart, 1827). I have in some cases
  sought to compare, but have not been able continuously to work with,
  the much better ed. of Suphan (32 vols.: Berlin, 1877-1887).

Footnote 659:

  The phrase is De Quincey’s and a good one: but it does not occur in
  his Essay on Herder, which is one of the most unsatisfactory things he
  ever did.

Footnote 660:

  _Einleitung_ to the _Fragmente_ (1767), ed. cit., i. 9.

Footnote 661:

  I am not yet sure whether Vico exercised much influence on Herder in
  this direction: but Herder certainly ranks next to Vico as a leader in
  it, and had as much more immediate and wide-spreading influence as he
  had less originality and force. Professor Flint, I may say, thinks the
  actual connection of the two slight.

Footnote 662:

  Ed. cit., vols. i. and ii.

Footnote 663:

  The Germans had been creditably troubled about their prosodic souls
  ever since Opitz (see the large concernment of this matter in
  Borinski, _op. cit. sup._); and the middle of the eighteenth century
  saw the strict iambic Alexandrines of Opitz himself and others
  deserted, partly for the so-called “British” or Miltonic scansion
  (decasyllables with certain licences of substitution), partly for
  classical metres and unrhymed “Pindarics,” both of which had a great
  reflex influence on ourselves.

Footnote 664:

  1769. Ed. cit., vols. xiii., xiv.

Footnote 665:

  _V. sup._ pp. 47, 48.

Footnote 666:

  Vol. xv.

Footnote 667:

  Vols. xv., xvi.

Footnote 668:

  For this and the rest see ed. cit., vols. xvii.-xx.

Footnote 669:

  See xviii. 65-99.

Footnote 670:

  His Shakespearian passages are numerous; see especially xvii. 228
  _sq._

Footnote 671:

  There can be no doubt that, here as elsewhere, Herder was
  administering a much-needed correction to the ridiculous Chauvinism of
  Klopstock, who was wont to extol German language and literature over
  all languages and literatures—past, present, and future, actual,
  possible, and impossible.

Footnote 672:

  Let me only add a reference to his own interesting sketch of German
  criticism up to his time. _Ideen_, ii. 55, 56, ed. cit. xvi. 159 _sq._

Footnote 673:

  I have used the ed. in 36 vols., Leipzig, 1839-40.

Footnote 674:

  29-36 in ed. cit.

Footnote 675:

  xxix. 129 _sq._

Footnote 676:

  xxxiii. 255.

Footnote 677:

  In same vol.

Footnote 678:

  In the _Bibliothek der Weltlitteratur_ of Cotta (Stuttgart, n. d.),
  which I use. Besides the texts more particularly noted above,
  _Dichtung und Wahrheit_ is perhaps the chief place to be examined: but
  nothing can be quite neglected. Readers confined to English may
  profitably consult _Criticism, Reflections, and Maxims of Goethe_
  (London, n. d.), ed. by W. B. Rönnfeldt, who thinks Goethe “probably
  the greatest literary and art critic whom the world has seen.”

Footnote 679:

  Goethe would probably not himself have refused this ascription, but
  might, on the contrary, have welcomed it. He even wanted the
  _Nibelungen_ in prose: and more than once, I think, adopts
  translateableness as a _criterion_ of Poetry (_v. inf._ note, p. 368).
  But this does not bridge, it only deepens, the gulf. Again, it may be,
  and has been, urged that in the _Hamlet_ piece he was avowedly
  speaking from the theatrical point of view in every direction. True
  again: but if anybody, with such literature as _Hamlet_ before him,
  can take this point of view, we know that his heart and his treasure
  lie, not in the book, but on the boards.

Footnote 680:

  _Allgemeine Begriffe und grosser Dünkel sind immer auf dem Wege
  entsetzliches Unglück anzurichten._—_Spr. in Pro._, ed. cit., p. 109.

Footnote 681:

  Ibid., p. 129.

Footnote 682:

  _Gehöre uns an_, p. 128.

Footnote 683:

  P. 177.

Footnote 684:

  P. 216.

Footnote 685:

  P. 143.

Footnote 686:

  P. 178.

Footnote 687:

   Pp. 165-169.

Footnote 688:

  _Schönste_, which, with _Geist_, is a little difficult to translate
  adequately. But it coincides interestingly with Lamb’s, “one of the
  wisest and finest spirits breathing,” of Hazlitt.

Footnote 689:

  We all laugh with Dickens when Lord Frederick Verisopht sums up
  Shakespeare as “a clayver man.” Yet it may be doubted whether Goethe
  had not in effect anticipated his lordship. It is almost always as the
  “clever” _man_, not as the Prospero of the poetic moment, that he
  considers Shakespeare.

Footnote 690:

  _V. sup._ p. 167.

Footnote 691:

  xxvii. and xxviii. The former is devoted to “German,” the latter (in
  part) to “Foreign” literature. This last contains much of interest,
  especially on French and English books of the last decade of Goethe’s
  life, and on Folk-Verse.

Footnote 692:

  Who probably meant “panoptic.” A work can be panoramic; an intellect
  hardly.

Footnote 693:

  xxvii. 25.

Footnote 694:

  xxviii. 60.

Footnote 695:

  I can give one very egregious example of this. The famous phrase,
  “Ueber allen Gipfeln ist Ruh,” has been seen from a very early period
  to have an allegorical, as well as a literal, interpretation. Indeed,
  in the Latin original (for the words are a translation, as genius
  translates, of Lucan, ii. 273, _Pacem summa tenent_) the context is
  perfectly unmistakable. I had myself fallen in love with _Ueber allen
  Gipfeln_ when I got the _Gedichte_ as a school-prize in the year 1860,
  and both the possible interpretations had struck me. Yet a very few
  years ago, for giving the _poetical_ application, I was solemnly
  warned by a reviewer that there was nothing disgraceful in my not
  knowing German, but that to pretend to do so, and to give an
  impossible meaning to well-known words, was quite intolerable.

Footnote 696:

  _Gespräche mit Goethe_ (3 vols., Stuttgart), i. 50.

Footnote 697:

  i. 66. It has been urged, not without justice, that this intense
  _craftsmanship_ must fairly be taken into account in estimating his
  criticism. He is always identifying himself with the worker rather
  than the spectator-reader, thinking of the process rather than of the
  result.

Footnote 698:

  i. 70.

Footnote 699:

  i. 102.

Footnote 700:

  Or at least “opponents”—_Gegner_, i. 104, 105.

Footnote 701:

  i. 116.

Footnote 702:

  i. 118.

Footnote 703:

  i. 120.

Footnote 704:

  1824.

Footnote 705:

  i. 166.

Footnote 706:

  i. 121.

Footnote 707:

  P. 125. Cf. what has been said above.

Footnote 708:

  P. 134.

Footnote 709:

  “Everything Pope said and thought of his friend was good and noble”—
  _The English Humourists._

Footnote 710:

  P. 182.

Footnote 711:

  P. 184. And again, the _craftsman’s_ point of view must be allowed
  for. Flemming “will not help the _poet of 1830_,” is what he means.

Footnote 712:

  P. 193.

Footnote 713:

  P. 219.

Footnote 714:

  P. 233.

Footnote 715:

  (_I.e._, the poetry of the horrible and the miserable) p. 245.

Footnote 716:

  P. 9.

Footnote 717:

  P. 26.

Footnote 718:

  P. 33.

Footnote 719:

  ii. 162.

Footnote 720:

  P. 180.

Footnote 721:

  Pp. 184, 194.

Footnote 722:

  With reinforcements from Soret, the Genevese botanist and
  mineralogist.

Footnote 723:

  iii. 29, “Jenes ungestörte unschuldige, nachtwandlerische Schaffen.”

Footnote 724:

  P. 86.

Footnote 725:

  P. 99.

Footnote 726:

  He had earlier said that Shakespeare and Molière did just the reverse.

Footnote 727:

  P. 102.

Footnote 728:

  P. 110.

Footnote 729:

  P. 161.

Footnote 730:

  I could make this point even clearer by putting together and enlarging
  upon his Shakespearian criticism: but this would take too much room,
  and it has been done in sample already. The English reader will find
  the chief texts collected in the first sixty pages of Mr Ronnfeldt’s
  book, cited above.

Footnote 731:

  ii. 10 _sq._

Footnote 732:

  P. 184 _sq._

Footnote 733:

  I do not forget his reviews of _Don Juan_, _Manfred_, and _Cain_: nor
  the rather astonishing attribution to _Don Juan_ itself of being the
  first book to supply English with “a polished comic language.”

Footnote 734:

  iii. 40.

Footnote 735:

  Once more the sordid “business” view which we noticed in regard to
  Flemming seems to have crept over him. He did, of course, admire the
  _Nibelugen_, and the Ballads, and some other things. But his general
  belittlement remains.

Footnote 736:

  Vols. xii.-xv. of the Cotta ed.

Footnote 737:

  _V. sup._, p. 368, and inf., p. 389.

Footnote 738:

  _V. inf._, p. 396.

Footnote 739:

  All these are in vol. xii. ed. cit.

Footnote 740:

  “On the Ground of Pleasure in Tragic Objects,” and “On the Tragic
  Art.” Vol. xiii.

Footnote 741:

  “Über Anmuth und Würde,” “Über das Pathetische,” “Zerstreute
  Betrachtungen,” and “Über die aesthetische Erziehung der Menschen.”
  All these fall under our exclusion of pure æsthetic, after the
  earliest examples in each country.

Footnote 742:

  The adjectives do not give the force of their originals. Schiller
  meant the poets who are not _self-conscious_ and those who are.

Footnote 743:

  _V. inf._, p. 395.

Footnote 744:

  In a note subjoined when the review was republished, eleven years
  after its first appearance, after Bürger’s death, and after Schlegel’s
  counter-blow.

Footnote 745:

  Unfortunately the Bürger review is not the only one, of the small
  handful given us, in which Schiller “harps and carps” in this evil
  fashion. That on _Egmont_ is almost as bad.

Footnote 746:

  Herr Boas, _op. cit. inf._, cites Gervinus as saying that his
  investigations entirely confirmed the _Xenien_ estimates. I have not
  verified the quotation, but I know enough of Gervinus (see on him
  _inf._) to be certain that his judgment would have been equally
  accommodating whatever these estimates had been.

Footnote 747:

  The most convenient subject for such a study known to me is the
  _Schiller und Goethe im Xenien-kampf_ of Eduard Boas (Stuttgart und
  Tübingen, 2 vols., 1851), which gives the text with all necessary
  apparatus, and a long account, with specimens, of the retorts of the
  victims and the appurtenant literature generally. I exclude, of
  course, from the remarks in the text the _Tabulæ Votivæ_, &c.

Footnote 748:

  No doubt there are exceptions. Goethe’s best seem to me 278 (directed,
  it is said, at F. Schlegel) and the rather ill-natured but clever
  _Charade_ (282). Schiller was happy in 346 on Gottsched as Tantalus:
  but any one could, and can, shoot Gottsched sitting.

Footnote 749:

  4 vols. in the Cotta collection. This also contains Schiller’s
  correspondence with Körner, which should be compared.

Footnote 750:

  1795-96.

Footnote 751:

  Letter 309, May 5, 1797; ed. cit., ii. 96.

Footnote 752:

  All the pieces here mentioned will be found in the Cotta ed. of
  Bürger’s _Ausgewählte Werke_. The epigram on Goethe’s doubling the
  part of artist and minister (ii. 78, ed. cit.) has much more satiric
  quality than most of the _Xenien_ themselves possess.

Footnote 753:

  Ed. cit., ii. 208. But Bürger ought to have faced the question, “If
  the asafœtidarian poet has travelled, and been convinced of roses,
  what then?” See, however, some notable things here on Style, &c.

Footnote 754:

  See his _Works_, or separately in two volumes of Cotta’s _Bibliothek_.
  The note cited is at i. 43. Observe that Richter was by no means a
  partisan Wielandist.

Footnote 755:

  In the Essay which opens the _Miscellanies_.

Footnote 756:

  A not unamiable reviewer has suggested that if I would draw up a neat
  tabular contrast of “Classic” and “Romantic,” and put it—mounted on
  linen, I presume, but he did not say so—in a pocket of this volume, it
  would be useful, especially for examinations. I am afraid I do not
  regard examinations in a sufficiently orthodox spirit to make any
  effort to supercram their crammableness, and I hope I have more wit
  than to attempt to define anything. Something, however, will be found
  in the Interchapters of this volume which may stimulate if it does not
  satisfy. The rest of the _Lector Benevolus_ may consider as destined
  to form part _du Quart Livre_, if I may speak Pantagruelically.

Footnote 757:

  The chief—a kind of classic—is R. Haym’s _Die Romantische Schule_
  (Berlin, 1870). Dr. Brandes’s later work on the subject, as on much
  else that we touch, should not need recommendation.

Footnote 758:

  _Novalis Schriften_ (3 vols., 1 and 2, 5th ed., Berlin 1837, 3, 1st
  ed., ibid., 1846), i. 239. Appendix-note to _Heinrich von
  Ofterdingen_.

Footnote 759:

  Translating it, with other things, in his Essay on Novalis.

Footnote 760:

  _Cosas de Inglaterra_ generally appear to have been (as he confesses,
  Shakespeare partly was) “dark” to Novalis. His is the famous statement
  that “every Englishman is an island.” Now islands form the most
  beautiful and delightful part of the earth’s surface: but you must go
  to them to know them.

Footnote 761:

  P. 179.

Footnote 762:

  P. 180.

Footnote 763:

  P. 185.

Footnote 764:

  Pp. 187, 188.

Footnote 765:

  P. 190.

Footnote 766:

  P. 195.

Footnote 767:

  iii. 164.

Footnote 768:

  iii. 164.

Footnote 769:

  P. 168.

Footnote 770:

  P. 174.

Footnote 771:

  P. 176. _All_ the context here is precious.

Footnote 772:

  4 vols., Leipzig, 1848-52. I fear it was not widely bought, for the
  first edition seems never to have gone out of print.

Footnote 773:

  Leipzig, 1855.

Footnote 774:

  One of the unluckiest is on _The Second Maiden’s Tragedy_ (i. 320),
  where he observes on the lines—

  “If you can construe but your doctor’s bill,
   _Parse_ your wife’s waiting-women.”
  “_Parse?_ Was kann es bedeuten?”
  “_Pierce_ ist dem aufmerksamen Auge
  leserlich genug.”

  Here one can only open one’s eyes at the question, and smother one’s
  reply.

Footnote 775:

  The _Works_ of Friedrich (except some _Juvenilia_) are included in a
  complete edition (Vienna, 1846) in fifteen vols., of which the first
  eight are entirely filled with critical matter. Of August Wilhelm,
  besides the _Sämmtliche Werke_ (12 vols., Leipzig, 1846), there are
  three vols. of French and two of Latin works, and also the _Lectures_,
  which were not published till 1884 (Heilbronn).

Footnote 776:

  They were redistributed later in the _Works_ of the brothers and in A.
  W.'s _Kritische Schriften_. But it is good to read, and possess, the
  original _Characteristiken und Kritiken_ (2 vols., Königsberg, 1801).

Footnote 777:

  I should think better of the criticism of Germany if it did not
  habitually speak of “Romeo und Juli_a_.” In the first place, it is
  surely common good manners not to alter an author’s title—though you
  may abbreviate it. In the second, which is more important, the change
  argues an æsthetic and gynæcologic callousness. Juli_a_ and Juli_et_
  are quite different persons.

Footnote 778:

  Schlegel was twenty-nine at the date of the earliest, and sixty-one
  when the book was published. The climacteric of accomplished youth and
  that of not yet absolutely declining age could not be much better hit
  off.

Footnote 779:

  i. 74-164.

Footnote 780:

  It opens the second vol., and goes to p. 81.

Footnote 781:

  _V. sup._, p. 81. That which follows on Voss, Matthisson, and Schmidt
  is rather over full of citation.

Footnote 782:

  I have already waived the controversy between Coleridge and the
  Schlegels. The fact is that the resemblance is mainly one of
  _attitude_—one of those results of “skyey influences” which constantly
  manifest themselves in different persons of genius and talent more or
  less simultaneously. And it may be added that the _general_ presence
  of this attitude in Coleridge before his German visit, before either
  Schlegel had attained any great notoriety, or had written anything
  likely to penetrate to England, or even anything very characteristic,
  is attested not merely by the concrete document, in not so very alien
  material, of _The Ancient Mariner_, but by testimonies as to his
  conversation, from half a dozen different people.

Footnote 783:

  It is No. 19, which describes Æsthetics as “the salt which dutiful
  disciples are going to put on the tail of the Ideal (enjoined upon
  them as so necessary to poetry), _as soon as they get near enough_.”

Footnote 784:

  Nor had Schlegel attained the art of grasping and exhibiting a writer,
  not merely as Sainte-Beuve was to do, but even as Johnson had done.
  The “Chamfort” in this book (i. 338-365) show this.

Footnote 785:

  _Gespr. mit Eck._, iii. 100. Effeminacy, as well as coxcombry, was
  frequently charged against him: and the unpopularity of both brothers
  as persons was very great. But this Camarina, like all such, is better
  unstirred.

Footnote 786:

  i. 47, ed. cit. He is “the last in value as in time,” of ancient
  critics, “the inventor of sentimental æsthetic,” “empty of ideas.”
  “All which propositions I for the present content myself,” as Carlyle
  observes in another matter, “with modestly, but peremptorily and
  irrevocably, denying.”

Footnote 787:

  P. 49. He bewails their “practical sterility,” their “muddle of Art
  and Nature” (_das man Kunst und Natur so durcheinander warf_), &c.

Footnote 788:

  He praises the _mot_, “According to Burke, the Beautiful is a
  tolerably pretty strumpet, and the Sublime is a grenadier with a big
  moustache.” Who said this?

Footnote 789:

  In several places, especially iii. 62, 63. There is a useful index to
  these lectures: but their condition requires a full table of contents.

Footnote 790:

  ii. 210, 313.

Footnote 791:

  The first and less complete issue, in 10 vols., was in 1821-25.

Footnote 792:

  Ed. cit., vols. i. and ii.

Footnote 793:

  Vols. iii., iv., v.

Footnote 794:

  Vol. vi.

Footnote 795:

  Vol. viii.

Footnote 796:

  Ibid.

Footnote 797:

  _Gesammelte Werke_, 6 vols., in the Cotta Library.

Footnote 798:

  Most of his best things were published by 1815, and many of these had
  been written years before.

Footnote 799:

  They fill 4 out of the 6 vols., as given in ed. cit.

Footnote 800:

  I have used the _second_ edition (Breslau, 1820). The first appeared
  in 1818, as a mere booklet in comparison.

Footnote 801:

  _Vorlesungen über Æsthetik_: Leipzig, 1829.

Footnote 802:

  P. 7.

Footnote 803:

  De Quincey’s Essay on Schlosser (_Works_, vol. vii.) is disfigured by
  his usual rather boisterous fooling and rigmarole, but very sound in
  the main.

Footnote 804:

  Vol. ii. Bk. VI. chap. iii. I do not yet know Molledano (R. y P. R.),
  _Historia literaria de España_, 9 (10) vols. 4to, 1769-79.

Footnote 805:

  See also _infra_ in the last chapter of the next Book. I suppose the
  name most likely to be missed here is that of Ugo Foscolo. The author
  of the _Letters of Jacopo Ortis_ must seem, to those who think
  Rousseau a critic, to be another, and the commentator on Petrarch and
  Dante certainly was one. But I think we can do without him.

Footnote 806:

  II. 216.

Footnote 807:

  _V. sup._, p. 386.

Footnote 808:

  See the Addenda-Corrigenda in this vol. for Dennis’s
  counter-assertion.

Footnote 809:

  Certain persons would, of course, omit even the provisos here: but of
  them I take no keep.

Footnote 810:

  The Germans did it rather earlier but not so well: the French almost
  if not quite as well and more voluminously, but later.

Footnote 811:

  The second Essay of the _Miscellanies_, vol. i.

Footnote 812:

  A hit, of course, at Coleridge, as, I suppose, is that above about
  “the nature of _the poet_.”

Footnote 813:

  This celebrated tractate, which cannot be too much honoured as a
  Counsel of Perfection, may be said to have started the belief,
  comfortable for those who entertain it, that all who follow not their
  notion of “Philosophy” and “the Idea” are “Completed Bunglers.”
  “Perhaps so, my dear! perhaps so,” as an excellent Bishop of the Roman
  branch of the Catholic Church is said to have once remarked to a
  little vulgar boy who told him he was “no gentleman.”

Footnote 814:

  Carlyle, in a very fine passage, admits their acceptance of “all true
  singers of every age and clime.” I fear the Devil’s Advocate’s devil,
  if you gave him a little time, could collect a curious _dossier_ of
  contrary instances: but this matters little. They _are_ entitled to
  credit for maintaining and spreading this catholic faith. But even
  Dryden, according to his lights, had championed it a century earlier;
  Gray, if he could have shaken off the deadly sin of Accidia—the
  deadliest to the man of letters—would have been Herder + either
  Schlegel, and more also, long before any of them; and Coleridge is
  Coleridge, however much he may have annoyed Carlyle at Highgate.

Footnote 815:

  P. 233 of the vol. for the University—year 1902-3.

Footnote 816:

  The rest of this Interchapter may be taken—like the two Appendices—as
  a sample of that fourth volume of “Critical Excursus” which I should
  have liked to give, had I thought that readers would endure it.

Footnote 817:

  Add some other blessings, as that the periodical can contradict
  itself—which the book sometimes does, but should not.

Footnote 818:

  I beg pardon: when I wrote the above I had not read the boast of the
  gentleman who could “come to a pile of new books, tear the entrails
  out of them, and write a 1500-word _causerie_, passably stylistic, all
  within sixty minutes”! But perhaps this also was irony?

Footnote 819:

  I take my examples as usual from English; but, as usual, nothing but
  the consideration of space prevents me from adducing French and German
  parallels.

Footnote 820:

  It was originally published, remember, before the death of Coleridge,
  and well within the period of our Book, even as to English.

Footnote 821:

  It is of course impossible to appreciate this stanza fully except as a
  modification, and in comparison with other modifications, of the
  normal decasyllabic quatrain of _Gondibert_ and _Annus Mirabilis_. Yet
  persons calling themselves critics have sometimes been amusingly
  indignant at the suggestion of this obvious fact.

Footnote 822:

  The original form of this, in 1832-33, was less perfect, but the aim
  and the principle are there already.

Footnote 823:

  Mr Hall Caine, in his _Cobwebs of Criticism_ (London, 1883); Mr E.
  Stevenson, in a useful and unpretentious collection of _Early Reviews_
  (London, n. d.), &c., &c.

Footnote 824:

  “Poetry has this much at least in common with religion, that its
  standards were fixed long ago by certain inspired writers, whose
  authority it is no longer lawful to call in question.” There may seem
  to be an ironic touch in this: but the whole article is written to the
  text.

Footnote 825:

  _V. sup._, vol. i. p. 252.

Footnote 826:

  These texts can be seen in detail in more than one modern book on
  Tennyson, and wholly in Mr Churton Collins’s painstaking and useful
  reprint of the _Early Poems_ (London, 1900).

Footnote 827:

  His books are too numerous to catalogue, and too equal in merit and
  defect to select from.

Footnote 828:

  _Tableau de la marche, &c., de la Littérature Française_: Paris, 1828.
  It may also be found at the end of the Didot ed. of La Harpe’s _Cours
  de Littérature_.

Footnote 829:

  He was a friend of my father’s in his English days, and I remember
  long ago seeing letters of his signed “Chasles _d’Almar_,” after a not
  uncommon French fashion.

Footnote 830:

  It fills perhaps the major part of the great collection of articles
  called _Les Œuvres et les Hommes_ (15 vols., Paris, 1860-95).

Footnote 831:

  xi. 72.

Footnote 832:

  See vol. xiii. of _Les Œuvres et les Hommes_.

Footnote 833:

  Note that the last outrage—_commune_—avenges Miss Austen of Madame de
  Staël.

Footnote 834:

  xii. 245.

Footnote 835:

  _Mélanges et Lettres_, 4 vols., Paris: 1876-77.

Footnote 836:

  _Op. cit._, i. 34 _sq._

Footnote 837:

  Printed in vol. iv.

Footnote 838:

  i. 432.

Footnote 839:

  i. 521.

Footnote 840:

  ii. 389.

Footnote 841:

  iii. 128.

Footnote 842:

  iv. 151.

Footnote 843:

  Not a little of the later published _Pensées_ (Paris, 1880) is
  definitely literary in subject; but the book is a small one, and its
  contents seem to me to lack something of the absolute spontaneity and
  _privacy_ of the larger and earlier collection. There are, however,
  noteworthy things; let me mention, as one of several for honour, the
  important dictum, p. 24, that “une forte mémoire _ne dénature pas_
  assez ce qu’on imite,” where Doudan trembles on the verge of that
  truth which so few have reached, that art is _dis_realisation. Not so
  good is the wish that Scott had attempted Wellington or Napoleon as a
  hero, for it shows that Doudan was unwilling to accept (what
  nevertheless, as the context shows, he half saw) the cardinal law of
  the Historical Novel, that the main personages must _not_ be
  historical.

Footnote 844:

  For an article in the _Fortnightly Review_ (May 1880).

Footnote 845:

  For the reprint and completion of that article in _Miscellaneous
  Essays_ (London, 1892).

Footnote 846:

  In the _Avenir de la Science_.

Footnote 847:

  See his _Derniers Essais de Critique et d’Histoire_ (Paris, 1894), a
  remarkably representative collection (though, of course, not
  dispensing the reader who really wishes to know, from consulting the
  earlier collections of the same general heading), and one specially to
  be recommended to those who only know the _Histoire de la Littérature
  Anglaise_. The _Letters_, earlier and later, I have not drawn upon.

Footnote 848:

  _V. sup._, p. 307.

Footnote 849:

  _Journal des Goncourt_, ii. 123.

Footnote 850:

  The first of these is _Les vies illustres s'éteignent sur tous les
  points du monde, comme les mille flambeaux d’une fête qui finit_. On
  this Taine’s comment is, “tout homme qui a tenu une plume tressaille
  en la lisant.” Most true: but how about time, place and _milieu_? The
  other is an exquisite conceit about the girl-speakers in the
  _Decameron_.

Footnote 851:

  In _Nouveaux Lundis_, and _Études Critiques_, respectively. M.
  Montégut’s deliverance is less important, for reasons to be mentioned
  presently. It does the _panegyrics_ admirably.

Footnote 852:

  _V. sup._, p. 349. Mérimée commends Taine highly to the _Inconnue_.

Footnote 853:

  In English he translated Shakespeare, Macaulay, and Emerson.

Footnote 854:

  Especially, some may say, when he does not like you, or what you like.

Footnote 855:

  This was probably due to the influence of Taine, with whom (as he once
  told me in an interesting letter in regard to some published remarks
  of mine) he at one time took much critical counsel.

Footnote 856:

  See the opening piece, “Du Caractère Anglais,” of _Essais sur la
  Littérature Anglaise_ (Paris, 1883).

Footnote 857:

  _Nos Morts Contemporains_, ii. 199 (Paris, 1884).

Footnote 858:

  In _Poètes et Artistes de l’Italie_. He was much pleased with the
  eulogy which I was able to bestow on this. M. Scherer was not—I cannot
  tell why, for certainly jealousy of praise given to somebody else was
  not one of his faults. Probably he did not like Boccaccio—or Alaciel.

Footnote 859:

  In the book already cited and its companion, _Écrivains Modernes de
  l’Angleterre_ (Paris, 1885).

Footnote 860:

  In the first series of _Nos Morts Contemporains_, but written long
  before “Théo’s” death, in 1865.

Footnote 861:

  _Écrivains Modernes de l’Angleterre_, as above.

Footnote 862:

  10 of _Études Critiques sur la Littérature_ (Paris, 1863-89), besides
  separate ones on Diderot, on Grimm, &c. I myself translated and edited
  his _Essays on English Literature_ (London, 1891).

Footnote 863:

  That is, since the period of the Reformation. I do not think he knew
  much of older date.

Footnote 864:

  It followed, that though less devoted to formulas than Taine, he was
  determined that all literary criticism must be connected with the
  exhibition of national character.

Footnote 865:

  He _had_ such a sense, both of French wit and of English humour, but
  within very narrow and sometimes quite arbitrarily drawn restrictions.

Footnote 866:

  The best examples of this group are perhaps the _Goethe_, known in
  England by Mr. Arnold’s essay, the _Taine’s English Literature_, and
  the treatment of Renan’s _Peuple d’Israël_.

Footnote 867:

  Gérard de Nerval ought to have been one of the best of these: but,
  like Mérimée and Gautier himself, he was much occupied with better
  things than criticism, and in it he chiefly dealt with drama.

Footnote 868:

  _Petit Traité de Poésie Française_: Paris, 1891.

Footnote 869:

  Paris, 1867: often reprinted.

Footnote 870:

  Paris, 1880, and later (3 vols.)

Footnote 871:

  The whole of the 2nd vol., _Curiosités Esthétiques_, and part of the
  3rd, _L’Art Romantique_, of his _Œuvres_ (4 vols., Paris, 1868), are
  occupied by this.

Footnote 872:

  One of the few wholly agreeable pieces of anecdotage contained in the
  _Journal des Goncourt_ seems to show that the accusations generally
  brought as to the poet having hastened his own end by reckless living
  were at least hasty. It seems that his mother, Madame Aupick, the most
  respectable of old ladies, died under the same curse of aphasia and
  general paralysis.

Footnote 873:

  It would be difficult to say quite the same of the _Œuvres Posthumes_
  (Paris, 1887), though these also contain valuable critical matter. But
  much is familiar letter-writing never intended for serious perusal,
  and not a little bears the clear marks of brain-disease.

Footnote 874:

  4 vols., Paris, 1861.

Footnote 875:

  The first volume—to George Sand, with Maupassant’s Introduction—
  appeared in 1884: the general Correspondence followed. George Sand’s
  replies, as well as other things of hers, give her a right to, at
  least, a place in this note.

Footnote 876:

  _V. inf._ on Mr Pater.

Footnote 877:

  Two such different persons and writers as Zola himself and M. Anatole
  France have, in different parts of the _Mémoires des Goncourt_, given
  true and valuable testimony to one of the great merits of that
  much-abused and certainly much-_abusable_ thing journalism—the
  facility and audacity, namely, which it confers. No doubt the facility
  which it gives may turn to slovenliness, and the boldness in
  attempting great tasks to levity: but this need not be so,—M. France
  himself is a convincing evidence in the one case at least. And there
  is no doubt that the practised habit of undertaking complicated things
  at short notice, and of doing the “day’s darg” in the day, protects a
  man from that “impossibility of getting ready,” that “not knowing how
  to begin” (and still less how to finish), which has sterilised even
  genius so frequently.

Footnote 878:

  The title of the first, _Mes Haines_ (Paris, 1866), is unlucky. Taken
  as a joke, it is not very good: taken seriously, it is fatal. It may
  not be easy to preserve the critical attitude when you love: that
  attitude is gone, without hope of recovery, as soon as you hate.

Footnote 879:

  Paris, 1880.

Footnote 880:

  All these will be found in the volume cited.

Footnote 881:

  _Op. cit._, p. 343.

Footnote 882:

  Again the enemy “has said it.” You cannot have a much better
  description of the highest literary art than this.

Footnote 883:

  He was drowned while bathing. _V._ _Mémoires des Goncourt_.

Footnote 884:

  _La Critique Scientifique_ (Paris, 1888), followed by _Études de Crit.
  Scient._, in two series (1889 and 1890). I am under the impression
  that Hennequin owed something—perhaps a good deal—to Mr H. M.
  Posnett’s _Comparative Literature_ (London, 1886), a book which, for
  the usual reason, escapes our survey. It may, however, be observed
  that “Comparative _Literature_” is a very awkward phrase, neither
  really representing “Littérature _Comparée_” nor really analogous to
  “Comparative Anatomy.” “Comparative _Study of_ Literature” would be
  all right: otherwise “Comparative _Criticism_” or “_Rhetoric_” is
  wanted.

Footnote 885:

  _La Critique Scientifique_, p. 29.

Footnote 886:

  This appeared in 1895; _Études de Littérature Européenne_ followed
  three years later, and _La Littérature Comparée_ in 1900. The
  contributions to Petit de Julleville have been noticed (ii. 528.
  note).

Footnote 887:

  For more on it, and on another kind of it, see below on the late Karl
  Hillebrand.

Footnote 888:

  _V. sup._, p. 97 _sq._

Footnote 889:

  A good example of his literary work is _La Fin du 18ième Siècle_ (2
  vols., Paris, 1880). He speaks of Diderot as _un essayiste à la façon
  Anglaise_, which is complimentary—and instructive.

Footnote 890:

  _Histoire de la Jeune Allemagne, Littérature Étrangère, Drames et
  Romans de la Vie Littéraire_, &c.

Footnote 891:

  Montégut (_v. sup._, p. 445) thought better of him.

Footnote 892:

  _V. sup._, p. 336.

Footnote 893:

  The posthumous _Épisodes Littéraires_ (Paris, 1890) contrasts very
  pleasantly with too many utterances “d’Outre-Tombe.”

Footnote 894:

  “Call yourself Voltaire: I promise you some sensations,” was one of
  his boasts which became famous. It was by no means mere bragging.

Footnote 895:

  Paris, 1856 onwards.

Footnote 896:

  In an essay originally published in _Macmillan’s Magazine_ for July
  1886, and reprinted in _Essays in English Literature_ (3rd. ed.,
  London, 1896).

Footnote 897:

  As I am not speaking _enfarinhadomente_ about Wilson’s faults, I may
  fairly protest against an exaggeration of them. It is surely unlucky
  of Mr Buxton Forman (_Keats’ Letters_, i. 46, ed. 1900) to talk of
  _Blackwood’s Magazine_ having “a monopoly of frowsy and unsavoury
  personal gibes” in “the possession of Christopher North,” when he had
  himself a few papers earlier cited Hazlitt’s almost Bedlamite
  Billingsgate against Southey in the _Examiner_.

Footnote 898:

  As the 4th vol. of _Essays Critical and Imaginative_ (4 vols.,
  Edinburgh, 1856-57). It follows Wilson’s usual lines of a running
  study of the poem and those who have written about it. Much of it, as
  of the essay on the _Agamemnon_ which follows, is occupied by a not
  uninteresting parallel-collection of translations.

Footnote 899:

  _Literature of Europe_, chap. xiv., § 82.

Footnote 900:

  It will be found in _Blackwood’s Magazine_, vols. xxxiv., xxxvi., and
  xxxvii. (Edinburgh, 1833-35).

Footnote 901:

  For this is one of the metaphors which (as Théophile Gautier boasted
  of his own, and as so few others can boast) _se suivent_.

Footnote 902:

  Ibid., vols. lvii., lviii. (1849).

Footnote 903:

  _Blackwood’s Magazine_, vols. lxv.-lxviii. and lxxii. (1849-52).

Footnote 904:

  There is much good as well as bad criticism here; but it is almost
  inevitable that the goodness should be obscured to too many tastes,
  and the bad intensified to almost all, by the setting of High Jinks.
  Yet Wilson, like Shakespeare according to Collier, “could be very
  serious,” and his defence of Croker against Macaulay is far more valid
  than has usually been allowed.

Footnote 905:

  Essays, i. 387 _sq._

Footnote 906:

  Ibid., ii. 109 _sq._

Footnote 907:

  Ibid., iii. 386.

Footnote 908:

  i. 179.

Footnote 909:

  As De Quincey had, for one who was not a novelist, the probably unique
  honour of four complete editions of his _Works_ in his last years and
  the generation succeeding his death, it is not easy to refer to him.
  But the last—Professor Masson’s of 1890—has the merit of methodical
  arrangement: and its tenth volume contains most of the _purely_
  critical things.

Footnote 910:

  In _Coleridge and Opium Eating_.

Footnote 911:

  As it is very dangerous to write about De Quincey, let me observe that
  this is a phrase of Mr Thackeray’s about another person, and implies
  affection and even admiration.

Footnote 912:

  In his “biography” of Goethe.

Footnote 913:

  Vol. x., ed. cit. Date, 1838-39.

Footnote 914:

  As such it will prove interesting to compare him with Nisard or
  Planche, especially the latter. But the comparison will, I fear, bring
  out that superiority of French criticism at _this_ time which, denying
  it at others, I fully admit.

Footnote 915:

  The objection of some folk to this useful word may be perhaps
  accounted for by their spelling it “protrept_r_ic.”

Footnote 916:

  This book, which often occurs in catalogues at a very moderate price,
  may be strongly recommended to intelligent book-buyers. It is pretty
  to look at, agreeable to handle, and delightful to read. _Janus_,
  another waif, in which he and Wilson collaborated, is less
  interesting. (For a fuller treatment of Lockhart, as of others, I may
  once more refer to my _Essays in Criticism_.)

Footnote 917:

  _Works_, 7 vols. (London, 1851-52), ed. Derwent Coleridge; _Poems and
  Memoir_, 2 vols.; _Essays_, 2; _Northern Worthies_, 3. An eighth, of
  _Fragments_, was promised; but if it ever appeared, I have not seen
  it.

Footnote 918:

  “The Professor,” it is hardly necessary to say, was an early and
  lifelong friend and neighbour of Hartley, whom he seems to have
  regarded with particular affection.

Footnote 919:

  It is, perhaps, not officious to subjoin a reminder that we have the
  curious pleasure of S. T. C.'s notes on Hartley in the _Biographia
  Borealis_. One of these—an objection to the phrase “prose Shakespeare”
  for Heywood—is very odd, as apparently showing forgetfulness of the
  fact that the phrase is not his eldest son’s, but his oldest friend’s.

Footnote 920:

  _Miscellanies, Prose and Verse_, by William Maginn, ed. R. W. Montagu.
  2 vols., London, 1885.

Footnote 921:

  They are scattered all over the _Memoirs of Morgan O’Doherty_, and
  often form independent items of the _Miscellanies_.

Footnote 922:

  It would have been interesting to hear Maginn on the Revised Version
  “after” the Authorised.

Footnote 923:

  Ed. cit., ii. 1-116. Let me guard carefully against being supposed
  myself to speak disrespectfully of Farmer, whose Essay will be found
  recently reprinted in Mr Nichol Smith’s collection. Farmer is at least
  as right against _his_ adversaries as Maginn against him.

Footnote 924:

  Ibid., pp. 117-144.

Footnote 925:

  In prose from _The Story without a Tail_, and in verse from _The
  Pewter Quart_ onward.

Footnote 926:

  _Life_, p. 309 _sq._, ed. cit.

Footnote 927:

  _Life_, p. 343 ed. cit.

Footnote 928:

  He was thirty-eight.

Footnote 929:

  One of the _in_justices is curious from a man of Scottish blood,
  though every Englishman would commit it, as I own I should have done
  till very late in my reviewing life. It is the satire on the
  comparison of a woman’s eyes to dew on “a bramble,” which of course in
  England means a _bush_, and in Scotland a _berry_. I wonder whether R.
  L. S. meant to appease the other poor Robert’s _manes_ when he wrote
  the phrase “eyes of gold and bramble-dew,” and I should have asked him
  had Fate permitted.

Footnote 930:

  It may seem whimsical: but I doubt whether any one of a really
  critical _ethos_ would put down, even in his private diary, that a
  private enemy and a hostile reviewer was “a bad, a very bad man, a
  scandal to politics and letters.” Criticism herself would, I think,
  condescend to give any of her favourite children’s ears an Apollonian
  twitch.

Footnote 931:

  Carlyle was an older man than Macaulay, but he began to publish
  original work later.

Footnote 932:

  Any one anxious really to appreciate Carlyle’s _potentia_ as a
  literary critic may be specially commended to this. It was written, of
  course, not merely before he developed his own style, but before the
  freer modern criticism had been largely developed by anybody except
  apart-dwelling stars like Coleridge. But it brands the author as a
  great critic _if he chose_. He did not wholly choose: and, later, he
  refused.

Footnote 933:

  London, 1896.

Footnote 934:

   Not that all Taylor’s ideas were preposterous. He and others of the
  Norwich School would make a good excursus. Even the “quotidian and
  stimulant” theory, of which Carlyle makes such fun, might have a
  chance with Carlyle’s own “highest aim of a nation.”

Footnote 935:

  More especially those on the _Nibelungenlied_ and Early German Poetry
  generally. These could hardly have been better done.

Footnote 936:

  As an out-and-out Scottite _and_ Carlylian, I would respectfully
  deprecate hasty judgment of this. It is a _crux ansata_, and you may
  easily get hold of the wrong handle.

Footnote 937:

  “O people of Paraguay! how long will you continue idiots?” If a casual
  half-breed really thus put politics and life in a nut-shell, he was
  certainly somebody.

Footnote 938:

  The different paging of the different editions makes it useless to
  give exact references. Nor are they wanted; for the “Contents” and
  Indices of Carlyle’s works are ideal.

Footnote 939:

  Had he been reading Vico?

Footnote 940:

  Since the text was written, a full collection of his literary
  criticism with many _anepecdota_, has appeared in Messrs Macmillan’s
  new edition.

Footnote 941:

  Edinburgh, 1899, p. 59.

Footnote 942:

  Ibid., note. p. 10.

Footnote 943:

  It is all the more remarkable that the writer was “not the first
  comer.” He was, I believe, William Smith, the author of _Thorndale_
  and other books much prized by good judges, a man of great talents,
  wide reading, and admirable character.

Footnote 944:

  My copy is the 2nd ed. Mr W. G. Clark’s preface to the 1st is dated
  “Ap. 1858,” rather less than a year after Brimley’s death.

Footnote 945:

   Cf. Chesterfield’s profound remark to Mme. de Mauconseil, on
  Christmas Day 1755: _Il me semble que le mal physique attendrit autant
  que le mal moral endurcit le cœur_.

Footnote 946:

  This idol had already had notice to quit. The Essay is of 1855, when
  it originally appeared in _Cambridge Essays_. Matthew Arnold’s
  admirable _Preface_ is two years older.

Footnote 947:

  The “Wordsworth” is some years earlier than the “Tennyson.” It
  appeared in _Fraser_ during the summer of 1851.

Footnote 948:

  He will reappear in the Appendix devoted to holders of the Oxford
  Chair of Poetry.

Footnote 949:

  In _Friends in Council_.

Footnote 950:

  I have slipped from N to O: but it is only next door.

Footnote 951:

  London, 1902.

Footnote 952:

  _Essays and Reviews_, London, 1876. The other papers—on Macaulay,
  Carlyle, Ruskin, George Eliot—are good, but not so good, and show that
  difficulty of the mid-century critic in “sticking to _literature_,”
  which is the theme of this chapter.

Footnote 953:

  London, 1866.

Footnote 954:

  London, 1866.

Footnote 955:

  That which amused me most is the employment, with the difference, of
  the cat-girl simile [_v. sup._, ii. 550]. I am sure I did not take it
  from him; and if we both took it from somebody else (to adopt the
  comfortable principles of Miss Teresa M’Whirter at the conclusion of
  _A Legend of the Rhine_), I do not know who the somebody else was.

Footnote 956:

  London, 1852.

Footnote 957:

  It is important to notice that he is not _hostile_, he is simply
  puzzled. The great method, which emerges first in Dryden, and which
  Sainte-Beuve perfected, of “shaking together” different literary
  examples, is still dark to him in practice, though, as has been said,
  he had a glimpse of its theory.

Footnote 958:

  Foster’s interest in literature—real, but very strongly coloured and
  conditioned by his moral and religious preoccupations—may be easily
  appraised by reading his Essays on “A Man Writing his Own Memoirs” and
  “The Epithet Romantic” in Bohn’s Library.

Footnote 959:

  Fox has the credit of “discovering” Browning, but there were personal
  reasons here. Much more, of course, were there such in A. H. Hallam’s
  essay on Tennyson—a rather overrated thing.

Footnote 960:

  Rogers is even “mentioned in despatches”—that is, by Sainte-Beuve.

Footnote 961:

  See his _Early Essays_ in Bohn’s reprint. The criticism of certain
  romantic poets of the mid century would make an interesting excursus
  of the kind which I have indicated as (if it were possible) fit to be
  included in a fourth volume of this work. Horne’s _New Spirit of the
  Age_ (1845), though exhibiting all the singular inadequacies,
  inequalities, and _inorganicisms_ of the author of _Orion_, does not
  entirely deserve the severe contrast which Thackeray drew between it
  and its original as given by Hazlitt. Mrs Browning, who took some part
  in this, has left a substantive critical contribution in _The Greek
  Christian Poets and the English Poets_, in which again the weaknesses
  of the writer in poetry are interestingly compensated by weaknesses in
  criticism, but in which again also, and much more, “the critic whom
  every poet must [or should] contain” sometimes asserts himself not
  unsuccessfully. W. C. Roscoe, whose verse is at least interesting, and
  has been thought something more, is critically not negligible. But
  perhaps the most interesting document which would have to be treated
  in such an excursus is Sydney Dobell’s _Nature of Poetry_, delivered
  as a lecture (it must have been something of a choke-pear for the
  audience) at Edinburgh in 1857. Here the author, though not
  _nominatim_, directly traverses Matthew Arnold’s doctrine in the great
  Preface (see next chapter), by maintaining that a perfect poem _will
  be_ the exhibition of a perfect mind, and, we may suppose, a less
  perfect but still defensible poem the exhibition of a less perfect
  mind—which principle, no doubt, is, in any case, the sole possible
  justification of _Festus_ and of _Balder_. Others (especially Sir
  Henry Taylor) might be added, but these will probably suffice.

Footnote 962:

  The immortality of critical error—the impossibility of quelling the
  Blatant Beast—to which we have alluded (ii. 554, note) is again
  illustrated here. One might have thought that Mr Arnold had
  sufficiently crushed and concluded this fallacy. It has been seen
  again—in places where it should not have been—in these last few years.

Footnote 963:

  This very generous assumption comes, I feel sure, from the blending of
  Wordsworth (_v. sup._, on him) with Aristotle.

Footnote 964:

  Mr Arnold never explicitly retracted this “pyramidal” exaggeration—it
  was not his way; but nearly the whole of his _French Critic on Goethe_
  is a transparent “hedge,” a scarcely ambiguous palinode. For the
  doctrine itself, see note at end of last chapter.

Footnote 965:

  I think Mr Arnold, especially after italicising these words, should
  really have told us as a WHAT we are to think of the author of
  Shakespeare’s greatest expressions.

Footnote 966:

  _V. sup._, i. 116.

Footnote 967:

  Those to the manner born or matriculated in it have generally been
  kind to him: but then he has given them rather considerable bribes.

Footnote 968:

  He has been largely imitated in this, and I cannot help thinking that
  it is a pity. If a man is definitely and ostensibly “reviewing”
  another man’s work, he has a perfect right, subject to the laws of
  good manners, to discuss him _quoad hoc_. But illustrations of general
  discourses by dragging in living persons seem to be forbidden by those
  laws as they apply in the literary province.

Footnote 969:

  This pearl of eighteenth century minor poetry occurs in the 7th (“The
  Wallflower”) of its author’s _Fables of Flora_ (Chalmers, xvi. 447). I
  think Scott’s unequalled combination of memory and taste has used it
  somewhere as a motto.

Footnote 970:

  _Gryll Grange_, chap. xiv. Cf. i. 381 note.

Footnote 971:

  Vol. i. p. 380. I might, and perhaps should, have introduced an
  interesting expression of more moderate opinion from St Basil, the
  pupil of Libanius, and the fellow-student of Julian. But I am glad
  that I did not, because I can introduce it here with an reference to
  the interesting translation published with Plutarch’s _How to Read
  Poetry_ (_v. sup._, i. 140), by Professor Paculford of the University
  of Washington (“Yale Studies,” No. xv.: New York, 1932). The Saint
  allows the study of the purer profane literature as a useful and
  ornamental _introduction_ to higher things.

Footnote 972:

  Not that he is wholly wrong in regard to either: while he does allow
  some of the almost unbelievable absurdities of Brooke’s eccentric,
  though far from “unimportant,” purpose-novel. But it is evident—and,
  indeed, confessed—that he is thinking of the ethical tone and spirit
  first, midmost, and almost last also.

Footnote 973:

  Not, again, that the _Short Studies_ especially can be neglected, even
  from our point of view.

Footnote 974:

  I have purposely taken all these examples from the _Selections_, where
  they will be easily found.

Footnote 975:

  The Essays comprising this, with their sequel and complement _The
  Inner Life of Art_, appeared in the _Fortnightly Review_ (which Lewes
  edited) at its beginning in 1865, and have been usefully reprinted by
  Mr T. S. Knowlson (London, n. d.) I may observe that the cheap and
  useful collection (the “Scott Library”) in which this reprint appears
  provides a large amount of other valuable critical matter.

Footnote 976:

  Chap. iii. p. 47 _sq._, ed. cit.

Footnote 977:

  Ibid., p. 113.

Footnote 978:

  Excepting (largely) the exceptions already made, and also the huge
  mass of his unreprinted contributions to newspapers. _The Leader_,
  under his editorship, was a pioneer of improvement in reviewing.

Footnote 979:

  The posthumous _Literary Studies_, and Mr Hutton’s essay (_v._ ed.
  cit. on next paragraph), are the places for studying him. The study
  may result, without protest from me, in a high opinion of his
  criticism.

Footnote 980:

  2 vols., London, 1894.

Footnote 981:

   I fully expect to be told by some critic that there is no such book,
  just as I once was told that Browning wrote no such poem as _James
  Lee_.

Footnote 982:

  Printed by Mr Gosse (London, 1896) privately: but I believe it has
  been included in the complete edition.

Footnote 983:

  I have always wondered what made him think that I personally prefer
  plain to ornate prose. The contrary, if it were of any moment, happens
  to be the case, though I own I think, as even De Quincey thought, that
  the ornate styles are not styles of all work.

Footnote 984:

  Nor do I think the “Postscript” of _Appreciations_, where the writer
  “Arnoldises” somewhat, one of his best things, good as it is.

Footnote 985:

   Especially in his numerous volumes of Essays and Studies, under
  various names.

Footnote 986:

  London, 1895.

Footnote 987:

  A “pair” for Mr Symonds from the other University might be found in
  the late Mr Frederick Myers, who, with more philosophical and less
  artistic tendency, exhibited an equally _flamboyant_ style.

Footnote 988:

  Its chief monuments or repertories are _Essays and Phantasies_
  (London, 1881) and _Poems, Essays, and Fragments_ (London, 1892).

Footnote 989:

  On men like Shelley and Blake, of course, Thomson was free from most
  of his “Satans”: and he speaks well on them.

Footnote 990:

  His _Defoe_, in the _English Men of Letters_ Series, is not to be
  overlooked.

Footnote 991:

  _Manual of English Prose Literature_ (Edinburgh, 1872);
  _Characteristics of English Poets, from Chaucer to Shirley_
  (Edinburgh, 1874).

Footnote 992:

  I do not know whether he contributed to anything before that
  remarkable periodical _The Dark Blue_, which, during its short life in
  the earliest 'Seventies, had a staff not easily surpassable, and
  almost reminding one of the earlier English _London Magazine_ and of
  the French _Globe_.

Footnote 993:

  Both in the _English Men of Letters_. The _Sterne_ appeared in 1882;
  the _Coleridge_ in 1884.

Footnote 994:

  _The New Fiction and other Essays on Literary Subjects_ (London,
  1897).

Footnote 995:

  See his _Letters, Lectures, and Reviews_: London, 1873.

Footnote 996:

  Especially in _Horæ Sabbaticæ_.

Footnote 997:

  London, 1873.

Footnote 998:

  London, 1889.

Footnote 999:

  London, 1893.

Footnote 1000:

  I do not mean that they were rubbish there. Rubbish is only “matter in
  the wrong place,” and what is rubbish in a book need by no means be
  rubbish in a newspaper.

Footnote 1001:

  London, 1880.

Footnote 1002:

  2 vols., London, 1887.

Footnote 1003:

  Such as even Gautier.

Footnote 1004:

  This sensibleness, no doubt, ought always to characterise the “Tertium
  Quid” or “cross-bench” mind. It is equally indubitable that it most
  commonly does not.

Footnote 1005:

  _T. Q._, vol. ii.

Footnote 1006:

  I do not take special notice of R. L. Stevenson here, because his
  criticism, in any formal shape, belongs mainly to the earlier and
  tentative stage of his work, and never, to my fancy, had much fixity
  or grip, interesting and stimulating as it is. I ventured to tell him,
  when I met him first, after the appearance of _The New Arabian Nights_
  in _London_, that _here_ was Apollo waiting for him, not there: and I
  hold to the view. Others, such as Mr Henley (with whom also I rowed in
  that galley—a tight and saucy one, if not exactly a _galère
  capitaine_), Mr Robert Buchanan, Sir Leslie Stephen, Prof. Bain, have
  passed away too recently; and yet others must fall into the _numerus_.

Footnote 1007:

  Bk. VIII.

Footnote 1008:

  In accordance with the absolute frankness which I have imposed upon
  myself, I shall confess here that my knowledge of the most modern
  German literature is much less complete than my knowledge of French
  and English.

Footnote 1009:

  I use the Cotta ed., in 13 vols.

Footnote 1010:

  The passage in the opening of the _Reisebilder_ ought to be
  sufficiently well known.

Footnote 1011:

  Ed. cit., vii. 172 and 215.

Footnote 1012:

  _Vermischte Schriften_, xii. 175

Footnote 1013:

  x. 225.

Footnote 1014:

  They should specially not read him on Börne.

Footnote 1015:

  Vol. iv., ed. cit.

Footnote 1016:

  The chief are at iv. 230 and x. 250.

Footnote 1017:

  Especially vii. 185 _sq._

Footnote 1018:

  vii. 239 _sq._

Footnote 1019:

  x. 216.

Footnote 1020:

  An excellent subject for one of those D.Litt. theses by which we are
  at last going to put ourselves on the level of Germany (to the
  satisfaction of persons who write about Education) would be “The
  _Reisebilder_ considered as an Allegory of Criticism, with some
  remarks on their excursions into Category.”

Footnote 1021:

  Ed. Cotta. I have not yet worked with the newer, and it is said
  better, ed. of Reclam.

Footnote 1022:

  Vols. 8-11 of the Cotta ed. It is from these that the material of
  _Schopenhauer’s Art of Literature_, translated by Mr Bailey Saunders
  (London, 1891), is taken. The excellence of Mr Saunders’s version is a
  matter of common consent. I am not quite so certain about his
  reconstitution of contexts, which is sometimes rather too much on a
  par with the taxidermic exploits of the late Mr Waterton; and he has
  left out some piquant things. But the advantage of opening such
  precious matter to merely English readers not only excuses this but
  makes excuse unnecessary.

Footnote 1023:

  Has any other German ever written quite such good prose as
  Schopenhauer’s?

Footnote 1024:

  _P. und P._, § 320, ed. cit., xi. 251.

Footnote 1025:

  In chap. xxiii. of _P. und P._, “Über Schriftstellerei und Stil.” Mr.
  Bailey Saunders isolates the Style part.

Footnote 1026:

  _P. und P._, § 384; _Art. of. Lit._, p. 6.

Footnote 1027:

  See chap. xxii. _Selbstdenken_. Schopenhauer’s maxim, “Reading is a
  mere _succedaneum_ (“Surrogat”) for thinking oneself,” at once shows
  what he means, and invites the reply, “Yes: but a man who knows how to
  read always makes his reading the seed of his thought.”

Footnote 1028:

  § 287. _Art. of Lit._, p. 11.

Footnote 1029:

  § 244. _Art. of Lit._ composes its section “on Criticism” of part of
  this context and another. The whole of the original chapter xx., “Über
  Urtheil, Kritik, Beifall und Ruhren,” is important, though the
  writer’s own soreness betrays itself, as usual, rather too much.

Footnote 1030:

  For the origin of the section thus headed in _Art. of Lit._, see back
  to chap. iii. of this part of _P. und P._

Footnote 1031:

  Book III. and App.

Footnote 1032:

  § 39.

Footnote 1033:

  App. on Poetry.

Footnote 1034:

  § 51.

Footnote 1035:

  _V. sup._, ii. 86.

Footnote 1036:

  One could develop, with special relevance, the philosopher’s
  peremptory limitation of the attractive season of womankind to the
  time between the ages of eighteen and eight-and-twenty: and his
  positive anathema on the _retroussé_ nose. It is astonishing how this
  feature disturbs critics! Cf. Lessing, Alison, Carrière, &c.

Footnote 1037:

  Ed. Cotta, Works, vols. xv.-xviii. The two vols. of _Letters_ and
  _Pocketbooks_, with which this edition has been reinforced since I
  wrote the text, add very much to our knowledge of Grillparzer’s
  personality, and something to that of his critical position: but need
  change nothing in the estimate above given.

Footnote 1038:

  Vol. xv.

Footnote 1039:

  xv. 24. The “peace” of Boccaccio and the “peace” of Dante combined!

Footnote 1040:

  Ibid.

Footnote 1041:

  xv. 27.

Footnote 1042:

  xv. 35-45.

Footnote 1043:

  P. 40.

Footnote 1044:

  P. 49.

Footnote 1045:

  P. 58.

Footnote 1046:

  P. 62, and elsewhere.

Footnote 1047:

  xv. 163. “Die Betrachtung tödtet, weil sie die Personlichkeit aufhebt:
  die Bemerkung erfrischt, denn sie erregt und unterstützt die
  Thätigkeit.” “Consideration” and “Observation” come nearest: but they
  are not fully adequate.

Footnote 1048:

  P. 176.

Footnote 1049:

  Filling the other three vols.

Footnote 1050:

  xvi. 158.

Footnote 1051:

  xviii. 97, 98. There is, not a judgment, but a curious mixture of
  compliment and fling on him, at p. 130, on which _v. inf._

Footnote 1052:

  xvi. 175.

Footnote 1053:

  xvi. 185.

Footnote 1054:

  xviii. 41.

Footnote 1055:

  xviii. 47-74.

Footnote 1056:

  xviii. 36. Grillparzer evidently did not care much for “woodnotes.”

Footnote 1057:

  See xviii. 12-24, and other places in the index of that volume.

Footnote 1058:

  See Scherer’s _History of German Literature_ under this name.
  Grillparzer himself, at Schreyvogel’s death, regrets (xviii. 130) the
  loss of his literary opinion, and says that there is no one left in
  Germany with whom he could talk in the same way “except perhaps Heine,
  if he were not intrinsically a scurvy _patronus_.”

Footnote 1059:

  Mr Bosanquet.

Footnote 1060:

  2 vols., Leipzig, 1859. Its constant and ingenious _illustration_, and
  the substantive importance given to Poetic, are its claims to
  admission here.

Footnote 1061:

  Of course they have their merits, and have had their uses. In material
  criticism often; in textual criticism sometimes; in merely _dramatic_
  criticism not seldom, they are useful to those who want these things.
  But then, as Mr Locker’s immortal friend at the “Travellers” said
  about the company next door, “One _doesn’t_ want them, you know,” or,
  rather, one wants something else and something more.

Footnote 1062:

  I use the Leipsic ed., 5 vols., 1871-74.

Footnote 1063:

  v. 37.

Footnote 1064:

  _Shakespeare-studien_: Stuttgart, 1866. One of M. Scherer’s best short
  criticisms is devoted to this book (_Études_, vol. vi., translated by
  the present writer in _Essays on English Literature_, by E. Scherer:
  London, 1891). But the original deserves reading. It is not much
  against it that the author relied on forgeries to some extent. The
  religion of “the document” almost necessarily passes into the
  superstition of the forgery.

Footnote 1065:

  Vol. xiv. of his _Works_ (Leipzig, 1887). The Preface is dated 1863.

Footnote 1066:

  7 vols., Berlin, 1874-85. There is a newer edition, I believe. As long
  ago as 1868 he had published, in French and at Paris, a volume of
  _Études Historiques et Littéraires_, and he did much else.

Footnote 1067:

  His Works are now obtainable in several forms, there being two
  _complete_ editions (Leipzig, n. d.), which give all the work
  published during his lifetime, in 8 vols., and a still lengthening
  tail of _Remains_ (7 vols. up to 1904), and several others of separate
  works. Writing on him has been exceedingly copious, “he has become a
  name”: but there is probably no sounder and fairer contribution to the
  _Um-Nietzschung_ of Nietzsche, from a portent into an intelligible
  phenomenon, than Professor Pringle-Pattison’s Essay in the 2nd ed. of
  _Man’s Place in the Cosmos_ (Edinburgh, 1902).

Footnote 1068:

  _Der Fall Wagner_, p. 36 and elsewhere.

Footnote 1069:

  I was pleased, in reading Nietzsche, after I had written the section
  above on Grillparzer, and when I had already assigned Hillebrand’s
  place here, to find him frequently quoting the Austrian dramatist with
  respect, and definitely selecting the other as the representative
  German critic of his time.

Footnote 1070:

  _V. inf._ The two books which preceded this, _Menschliches
  Allzumenschliches_ and _Morgenröthe_, are also almost purely ethical,
  though the extensive handling of moral philosophers in the past is
  necessarily literary too.

Footnote 1071:

  It would be improper to dwell on this point here. I hope to do more
  justice to Nietzsche’s purely literary side elsewhere.

Footnote 1072:

  This word has been objected to by precisians. But it has the authority
  of Thackeray: and if it had none, it is exactly the word wanted for a
  certain flagrant quality of the latest nineteenth century, and more
  especially for the _ethos_ of Nietzsche. With all his originality in
  form, he is simply parasitic in fact. He can only deny and pervert and
  “topsyturvify” the established and accepted. The _Uebermensch_ himself
  is much more an “_Un_mensch,” who is not to be God but an un-God. And
  the philosopher’s famous syllogism, “There cannot be a God, or why am
  _I_ not one if there is?” amounts simply to a turning topsyturvy of
  the much sounder and in fact unanswerable argument, “There must be a
  God; for _I_ am not one.”

Footnote 1073:

  Even later his alleged doctrine of “Recurrence”—not his most repugnant
  to poetry, or philosophy, or religion itself—was only an echo of the
  carpenter in _Peter Simple_!

Footnote 1074:

  _Beleidigende Klarheit._

Footnote 1075:

  _Ein Geist der entnervt._

Footnote 1076:

  He somewhere speaks of Stendhal and Dostoieffsky as his “two great
  discoveries.” A curious fling by implication at Baudelaire means, I
  think, only that Baudelaire had the impudence to admire Wagner.

Footnote 1077:

  _Falschmünzler._

Footnote 1078:

  16th ed., pp. x, 756 (Città di Castello, 1902).

Footnote 1079:

  One famous person may be noted exceptionally. A critic who held
  political and other views contrary to Mazzini’s, and who thought (as
  too many critics have apparently thought) that it is lawful to wreak
  vengeance in the literary sphere for sins committed elsewhere, would
  have a considerable opportunity with Mazzini himself, as a critic. He
  has written not a little apparently of the kind, and about very
  important persons—Dante, Goethe, Byron, Mr Carlyle, papers on all of
  whom will be found in Mr William Clarke’s useful English edition of
  Mazzini’s selected Essays (London, n.d.) He has said things for which,
  if one were a Veuillot, one could, in Veuillot’s own phrase, “promise
  him sensations.” But this is not _our_ way. One soon sees (in fact, I
  think, he frankly confesses it in more than one place) that the writer
  is not thinking of these great writers as writers at all, nor of their
  books as books. He is thinking of their relation, actual or by
  ingenuity representable, towards his idol of “Collective Humanity,”
  and he is talking, as he is thinking, of nothing else. We have nothing
  here to do with Collective Humanity, but much with the Humanities,
  which are different: and so he escapes our jurisdiction. Perhaps a
  good many more modern Italians would do the same, that influence of
  Vico, which we noted in Signor Croce, being very strong in them.

Footnote 1080:

  _Saggi Critici_, _v. inf._

Footnote 1081:

  Naples (2nd ed.), 1869.

Footnote 1082:

  Naples, 1872.

Footnote 1083:

  Sismondi—French-writing, Swiss-born, Italian by origin—may seem to
  claim admission, if only for his _Littérature du Midi_: but I think
  not.

Footnote 1084:

  3 vols., Bâle, 1829-30.

Footnote 1085:

  2 vols., Paris, 1851.

Footnote 1086:

  2nd ed., 3 vols., Paris, 1857.

Footnote 1087:

  A very large part (about two-thirds) of the 1st volume is occupied by
  Chateaubriand.

Footnote 1088:

  Lamartine (with whom Vinet is, of course, more _comfortable_) and Hugo
  have about three-fourths of the 2nd vol. between them. In this and the
  3rd, Béranger, Delavigne, Sainte-Beuve, Quinet, Michelet, and many
  others, figure.

Footnote 1089:

  ii. 387-412.

Footnote 1090:

  It is fair to say that much of his work, being posthumously published,
  _is_ lecture, and might, if he had lived, have been worked up by him
  into a better form.

Footnote 1091:

  In the article on Saint-Marc Girardin, which concludes the third
  volume.

Footnote 1092:

  8th ed., 2 vols., Geneva, 1901.

Footnote 1093:

  Nor can I recognise his description of Amiel’s treatment of a literary
  subject at p. xix of the Introduction—“Il l’embrasse, mais au dehors.”
  Alas! the Lucretian _nequicquam_ comes in here again: but I should say
  that few men’s critical embraces were more intimate than Amiel’s,
  brief as they are.

Footnote 1094:

  i. 12.

Footnote 1095:

  i. 17.

Footnote 1096:

  i. 69.

Footnote 1097:

  i. 129.

Footnote 1098:

  The _entrefilet_ of the 7th of November 1862 on _la critique
  indifférente_, though it quite certainly is not meant wholly or even
  mainly for literary criticism, should not be missed.

Footnote 1099:

  i. 167, April 24, 1862; and i. 176-183, January 8 and 13, April 8,
  1863.

Footnote 1100:

  i. 194; ii. 219.

Footnote 1101:

  i. 229.

Footnote 1102:

  ii. 110.

Footnote 1103:

  On German “vulgarity,” p. 112 (with which an acute passage on Goethe
  at p. 120 should be compared); on the two poetesses, Louisa Siefert
  and Mme. Ackermann (141 and 174); a valiant promulgation of the truth
  that most fear to speak, “There is no Progress” (167); notes on M.
  Coppée (200); Hugo again (228); La Fontaine (232); Laprade (280);
  Stendhal (286).

Footnote 1104:

  It does not seem necessary to follow the lines of the earlier
  Interchapters by summarising distributively the critical results of
  the period in different countries and phases. The very indefiniteness
  of the whole establishes a community which can be generally pointed
  out.




                               APPENDICES


                              APPENDIX I.

                      THE OXFORD CHAIR OF POETRY.

THE HOLDERS—EIGHTEENTH CENTURY MINORS—LOWTH— HURDIS—THE RALLY:
    COPLESTON—CONYBEARE— MILMAN—KEBLE—THE ‘OCCASIONAL [ENGLISH] PAPERS’—
    THE ‘PRÆLECTIONS’—GARBETT—CLAUGHTON— DOYLE—SHAIRP—PALGRAVE—
    “SALUTANTUR VIVI.”


(_I have thought this sketch worth giving, partly as an example of the
kind of excursus which might be appended, perhaps not without some
advantage, and certainly in some numbers, to this History. But I give it
also because it illustrates—in a manner which cannot be elsewhere
paralleled at all in our own country, and to which I know no Continental
parallel—by a continuous and unbroken chain of instances and
applications, the course of European as well as English theory,
practice, and taste in Criticism, from a period when the Neo-classic
creed was still in at least apparently fullest flourishing, through
nearly two whole centuries, to what, in the eye of history, is the
present moment. The enforced vacation of the Chair after a single decade
at most, and its filling by popular election, and not by the choice of
an individual or a board, add to its representative character: and the
usual publication of at least some of the results, in each case, makes
that character almost uniquely discoverable in its continuity, while
even the change of vehicles from Latin to English is not without its
importance. There is no room here—and it would perhaps be unnecessary in
any case—to anticipate the easy labour of summarising its lessons. But I
think they may be said to emphasise the warning—frequently given or
hinted already—that the result of the altered conditions and laws of
criticism is not clear gain. No part of Mr Arnold’s best critical work
was, I think, done for the Chair; and I should myself be inclined to
select, as the best work actually done for it, that of Keble, who
represents the combination of the old Classical-Preceptist tradition,
with something of the new comparison and free expatiation, as well as
very much of the purely appreciative tendency._)

[Sidenote: _The holders._]

This Chair—founded by Henry Birkhead, D.C.L., a Trinity man, a Fellow of
All Souls, and a member of the Inner Temple—began its operations in
1708, the conditions of its tenure (which have only recently been
altered) providing for a first holding of five years, a single renewal
for the same period, and a sort of rotation, in the sense that the same
college could not supply two successive occupants. The actual incumbents
have been: 1708-18, Trapp; 1718-28, Thomas Warton the elder; 1728-38,
Spence; 1738-41, John Whitf(i)eld; 1741-51 (the most distinguished name
as yet), Lowth; 1751-56, William Hawkins; 1756-66, Thomas Warton the
younger; 1766-76, Benjamin Wheeler; 1776-83, Randolph; 1783-93, Holmes;
1793 to 1802, Hurdis. With the nineteenth century a brighter order
begins, all but one or two of the Professors having made their mark out
of the Chair as well as in it. They were: Copleston, 1802-12; Conybeare,
1812-21; Milman, 1821-31; Keble, 1831-42; Garbett (the dark star of this
group, but, as we shall see, not quite lightless), 1842-52; Claughton,
1852-57; Matthew Arnold, 1857-67; Sir Francis Doyle, 1867-77; Principal
Shairp, 1877-87; Mr Palgrave, 1887-95; while of living occupants Mr
Courthope resigned the Chair after a single tenure; and Mr Bradley was
elected to it under a statutory limitation to this term.

[Sidenote: _Eighteenth century minors._]

Of these, Trapp, Spence, the younger Warton, and Arnold have received
notice in the text, which would have been theirs had they never held the
Chair. The lucubrations of the first held for some time an honourable
place as an accepted handbook on the subject. Spence, profiting by the
almost Elysian tolerance of his sensible century, and finding that
neither residence nor lecturing was insisted on, seems to have resided
very little, and to have lectured hardly or not at all. Tom Warton the
younger, whose _History_ would have dignified any _cathedra_, appears to
have devoted himself during his actual tenure entirely to the classics,
and never to have published any of his lectures except one on
Theocritus. His father, in the interval between the respectable labours
of Trapp and the philosophical silence of Spence, had earned no golden
opinions, and though the repeated attacks of Amherst in _Terræ Filius_
may have been due partly to political rancour, and partly to that
ingenious and unlucky person’s incorrigible Ishmaelitism, it seems to
have been admitted that the Professor’s understanding and erudition lay
very open to criticism, and that his elocution and manner were not such
as could shield them. Of Whitfield, Hawkins, Wheeler, Randolph, and
Holmes, what I have been able to gather may best be set in a note.[1105]
The first person to make any real figure in and for the Chair was the
author of _De Sacra Poesi Hebræorum_, which at once attained not merely
an English but a European reputation.

[Sidenote: _Lowth._]

To discuss the Hebrew scholarship of this famous book (which was first
published in 1753, and repeatedly reprinted, revised, translated,
attacked, defended) would be wholly out of place here, even if the
writer had not almost wholly forgotten the little Hebrew he learnt at
school. It is still, I believe—even by specialists with no general
knowledge of literature—admitted to have been epoch-making in its
insistence on the parallelism of Hebrew poetry. But to those who take
the historical view of literature and of criticism its place is secure
quite apart from this. Not merely in the Renaissance, but in the Middle
and even the Dark Ages, the matter of the Bible had been used to
parallel and illustrate rhetorical and literary doctrines and rules. But
Lowth was almost the first to treat its poetical forms from something
like the standpoint of sound comparative literary criticism.[1106] Now
this, as the whole tenor of our book has gone to contend, was the chief
and principal thing that had to be done. If we have any advantage over
the men of old, it is that we (or some of us) have at last mastered the
fact that one literature or one language cannot _prescribe_ anything to
another, but that it may _teach_ much. And this new instance of a
literature—unique in special claims to reverence, unique likewise in the
fact that in its best examples it could owe nothing to those Greeks and
Romans who have so beneficently but so tyrannously influenced all the
modern tongues—was invaluable in its quality and almost incalculable in
its moment. That Lowth’s exposition resulted directly or indirectly in
not a little maladroit _imitation_ of Hebrew poetry was not his fault;
his critical lesson was wholly good.

[Sidenote: _Hurdis._]

Hurdis, a person now very much forgotten, had his day of interest and of
something like position. He is not unfrequently quoted by writers,
especially by Southey, of the great period of 1800-1830, which he a
little preceded, and he has the honour—rare for so recent a writer—of a
whole article[1107] on his poems in the _Retrospective Review_. As a
poet he was mainly an imitator of his friend Cowper—a fact which, with
the title of his chief work, _The Village Curate_, will give intending
or declining readers a sufficiently exact idea of what they are
undertaking or relinquishing. Easy blank verse, abundant and often not
infelicitous description, and unexceptionable though slightly copybook
sentiments,[1108] form his poetic or versifying staple. As a critic I
regret to find that my note on him is “Chatter”: and I do not know
anything of his that makes me, on reflection, think this unjust.

[Sidenote: _The rally: Copleston._]

I should be half afraid that the interest which I feel in the next set
of Prælections, those of Edward Copleston,—“_the_ Provost,” as he
anticipated Hawkins in being to Oxford men, even not of his own college
of Oriel,—might be set down to that _boulimia_ or morbid appetite for
critical writings of which I have been accused, if I had not at hand a
very potent compurgator. Keble, it is true, was a personal friend of
Copleston’s. But he was not at all the man to let personal friendship,
any more than personal enmity, bias his judgment; and he was admirably
qualified to judge. Yet he says deliberately[1109] that the book “is by
far the most distinct, and the richest in matter, of any which it has
fallen to our lot to read on the subject.” I cannot myself go quite so
far as that, and I doubt whether Keble himself would have gone so far
when, twenty years later, he wrote his own exquisite Lectures; but I can
go a long way towards it.

The future Provost and Bishop has, indeed, other critical proofs on
which to rely,[1110]—the famous and excellent “Advice to a Young
Reviewer,” which I fear is just as much needed, and just as little
heeded, as it was a hundred years ago, the admirable smashing of the
_Edinburgh’s_ attack on Oxford, and other matters,—but the
_Prælections_[1111] are the chief and principal thing. Keble insisted
that they ought to be Englished, but I am not so sure. They form one of
the _severest_ critical treatises with which I am acquainted; and some
of the features of this severity would, I think, appear positively
uninviting in English dress, while they consistently and perfectly suit
the toga and the sandal. But I must explain a little more fully in what
this “severity” consists; for the word is ambiguous. I do not mean that
Copleston rejects Pleasure as the end of Poetry; for, on the contrary,
he writes _Delectare_ boldly on his shield, and omits _prodesse_ save as
an indirect consequence. I do not mean that he is a very Draconic critic
of particulars, though he can speak his mind trenchantly enough.[1112]
Nor do I mean that he is a very abstract writer; for every page is
strewn with concrete illustrations, very well selected, and, for the
most part, un-hackneyed.

His severity is rather of the ascetic and “methodist” kind; he
resembles nothing so much as a preceptist of the school of
Hermogenes, who should have discarded triviality, and risen to very
nearly the weight and substance of Aristotle. At the very beginning
he makes a statute for himself, to cite no literature but Greek and
Latin, and to use no language but these. And he never breaks either
rule; for though, on rare occasions, he refers to English writers—
Shakespeare, Milton, Dryden, Burke, Reynolds[1113]—it is a reference
only to books, or poems, or passages, never a citation. And in the
second place his method is throughout—constant as is his use of the
actual poetic object-lesson—to proceed by general categories, not of
poetic kinds (he shuns that ancient and now well-beaconed
quicksand[1114]) but of qualities, constituents, means. His whole
book, after a brief definition or apology for not defining, is
distributed under four parts,—Of Imitation, Of the Emotions, Of
Imagination (Phantasia), and Of Judgment,—though he never reached
the fourth,[1115] owing to his tenure of the Chair coming to an end.
After a pretty full discussion of the nature and subject of
Imitation, he makes his link with his next subject by dwelling on
the _Imitatio morum_, and so of the Passions themselves. In this
part a very large share is given to the subject of _Sententiæ_—
“sentiments,” as Keble translates it, though, as I have pointed out
formerly,[1116] no single translation of the word is at all
satisfactory. The section on Imagination is very interesting.
Copleston is at a sort of middle stage between the restricted
Addisonian and the wide Philostratean-Shakespearean-Coleridgean
interpretation of the word. He expressly admits that other senses
besides sight can supply the material of _Phantasia_; but his
examples are mainly drawn from material which _is_ furnished by the
sight, and his inclusions of Allegory, Mythology, &c., with other
things, sometimes smack of an insufficient discrimination between
Imagination and Fancy. Indeed the fact that he is Præ-Coleridgean
helps to give him his interest.

Keble mildly complains that Copleston does not make use of that doctrine
of Association which he himself, writing so early, had perhaps adopted,
not from Coleridge but direct from Hartley. We have, in our day, seen
this doctrine worked to death and sent to the knacker’s in philosophy
generally; but there is no doubt that it can never be neglected in
poetry, being, perhaps, the most universal (though by no means _the_
universal) means of approach to the sources of the poetic pleasure. It
does not, however, seem to me that Copleston intended to mount so high,
or go so far back: his aim was, I think, more rhetorical, according to a
special fashion, than metacritical. But his mediate axioms are numerous
and often very informing: and his illustrations, as has been said,
abundant, really illustrative, and singularly recreative. He lays most
Latin and many Greek poets under contribution; but some of his most
effective examples are drawn from a poet whom he does not critically
overvalue, but who has no doubt been, as a rule, critically undervalued,
and for whom he himself evidently had a discriminating affection—that is
to say, Claudian.

On the whole, the appearance of a book of this scope and scheme, at the
very junction of the centuries and the ’isms, Classic and Romantic, is
of singular interest. Until intelligent study of the Higher Rhetoric—
reformed, adjusted, and extended—has been reintroduced, such another
will not come. But such another might come with very great advantage,
and would supply a very important _tertium quid_ to the mere Æsthetics
and to the sheer Impressionism between which Criticism has too often
divided itself.

[Sidenote: _Conybeare._]

There is almost as much significance in Copleston’s successor, though it
is a significance of a different kind. For J. J. Conybeare was the first
Professor of Poetry to bestow attention on Anglo-Saxon (Warton, even in
his _History_, had not gone, with any knowledge, beyond Middle English),
and so to complete the survey of all English Literature. Before his
appointment he had held, as its first occupant, the chair of Anglo-Saxon
itself; and while Professor of Poetry he was a country parson. He died
suddenly and comparatively young, and his remarkable _Illustrations of
Anglo-Saxon Poetry_[1117] were published after his death by his brother,
who is actually responsible for a good part of its matter, so that the
book is a composite one. It is thus mainly in its general significance—
for Conybeare’s Prælections as Professor were not, so far as I know,
published—that it is valuable for us. But the value thus given is
unmistakable. Conybeare’s individual judgments and _aperçus_ are always
interesting, and often acute; but his real importance lies in the fact
that he was almost the first—though Mitford, after Ellis, had attempted
the thing as an outsider—to move back the focussing-point sufficiently
to get _all_ English Literature under view. Nothing could serve more
effectually to break up the false standing-ground of the eighteenth
century.

[Sidenote: _Milman._]

A curious but perhaps not surprising thing about Milman’s Professorship
is that it aroused the ire of an undergraduate poet of the rarest though
of the most eccentric type—namely, Beddoes. If Milman really did
“denounce” _Death’s Jest-Book_,[1118] it is a pity that his lectures
were (so far as I know) never printed, or at least collected, for there
might have been more such things of the fatally interesting kind which
establishes the rule that Professors should not deal, in their lectures,
with contemporary literature. It was certainly unlucky for a man to
begin by objecting in one official capacity to _Death’s Jest-Book_, and
to end by objecting in another to Stevens’s Wellington Monument. And
that Milman had generally the character of a harsh and donnish critic is
obvious, from Byron’s well-known suggestion of him as a possible
candidate for the authorship of the _Quarterly_ article on Keats, though
the rhyme of “kill man” may have had something to do with this. If he
wrote much literary criticism we have little of it in the volume of
_Essays_ which his son published, after his death, in 1870. Even on
Erasmus—surely a tempting subject—he manages to be as little literary as
is possible, and rather less than one might have thought to be; and his
much better-known _Histories_ are not more so.

[Sidenote: _Keble._]

Ignorance may sneer, but Knowledge will not even smile, at the dictum
that not the least critical genius that ever adorned the Oxford Chair
was possessed by John Keble. There is some faint excuse for Ignorance.
The actual _Prælections_[1119] of the author of _The Christian Year_,
being Latin, are not read: his chief English critical works,[1120]
though collected not so very long ago, were collected too late to catch
that flood-tide, in their own sense, which is unfortunately, as a rule,
needed to land critical works out of reach of the ordinary ebb.
Moreover, there is no question but Keble requires “allowance”; and the
allowance which he requires is too often of the kind least freely
granted in the present day. If we have anywhere (I hope we have) a man
as holy as Keble, and as learned, and as acute, he will hardly express
the horror at Scott’s occasional use of strong language which Keble
expresses.[1121] Our historic sense, and our illegitimate advantage of
perspective, have at least taught us that to quarrel with Scott again,
for not being “Catholic” enough, is almost to quarrel with Moses for not
having actually led the children of Israel into Palestine. And no man,
as honest as Keble was, would now echo that other accusation against the
great magician (whom, remember, Keble almost adored, and of whom he
thought far more highly as a poet than many good men do now) of
tolerating intemperance; though some might feign it to suit a popular
cant.

But in all these respects it is perfectly easy for those who have once
schooled themselves to this apparently but not really difficult matter,
to make the necessary allowance.[1122] And then, even in the English
critical Essays—the “Scott,” the “Sacred Poetry,” the “Unpublished
Letters of Warburton,” and the “Copleston”—_verus incessu patet
criticus_.

[Sidenote: _The_ Occasional [_English_] Papers.]

His general attitude to poetic criticism (he meddled little with any
other) is extremely interesting. His classical training impelled him
towards the “subject” theory, and the fact that his two great idols in
modern English poetry were Scott and Wordsworth was not likely to hold
him back. He has even drifted towards a weir, pretty clearly, one would
think, marked “Danger!” by asking whether readers do not feel the
attraction of Scott’s novels to be as great as, and practically
identical with, that of his poems. But no “classic” could possibly have
framed the definition of poetry which he puts at the outset[1123] of the
Scott Essay as “The indirect expression in words, most appropriately in
metrical words, of some overpowering emotion, or ruling taste, or
feeling, the direct indulgence whereof is somehow repressed.” Everybody
will see what this owes to Wordsworth; everybody should see how it is
glossed and amplified—in a non-Wordsworthian or an extra-Wordsworthian
sense. We meet the pure critical Keble again, in his enthusiastic
adoption of Copleston’s preference for “Delight” (putting Instruction
politely in the pocket) as the poetic criterion.[1124] And his defence
of Sacred Poetry, however interested it may seem to be, coming from him,
is one of the capital essays of English criticism. He makes mince-meat
of Johnson, and he takes by anticipation a good deal of the brilliancy
out of his brilliant successor, Mr Arnold, on this subject. The passage,
short but substantial,[1125] on Spenser in this is one of the very best
to be found on that critic of critics (as by an easily intelligible play
he might be said to be) as well as poet of poets. Spenser always finds
out a bad critic—he tries good ones at their highest.

[Sidenote: _The_ Prælections.]

Still the _Prælections_ themselves must, of course, always be Keble’s
own touchstone, or rather his ground and matter of assay. And he comes
out well. The dedication (a model of stately enthusiasm) to Wordsworth
as _non solum dulcissimæ poeseos verum etiam divinæ veritatis antistes_,
strikes the keynote of the whole. But it may be surprising to some to
find how “broad” Keble is, in spite of his inflexible morality and his
uncompromising churchmanship. He was kept right partly, no doubt, by
holding fast as a matter of theory to the “Delight” test—pure and
virtuous delight, of course, but still delight, first of all and most of
all. But mere theory would have availed him little without the poetic
spirit, which everywhere in him translates itself into the critical, and
almost as little without the wide and (whether deliberately so or not)
comparative reading of ancient and modern verse which he displays. His
general definition of Poetry here is slightly different from that given
above, as was indeed required by his subject and object. He presents it—
at once refining and enlarging upon part of the Aristotelian one of
Tragedy, and neutralising the _vinum dæmonum_ notion at once,—as
_subsidium benigni numinis_, the medicinal aid given by God to subdue,
soften, and sanctify Passion. But his working out—necessarily, in its
main lines, obvious but interesting to contrast with his successor Mr
Arnold’s undogmatised and secularised application of the same
idea[1126]—is less interesting to us in itself than the _aperçus_ on
different poets, ancient and modern, to which it gives rise. Few pages
deserve to be skipped by the student: even technical discussion of the
_tenuis et arguta_ kind, as he modestly calls it, becomes alive under
his hand on such subjects as the connection of Poetry and Irony (_Præl._
v.) But there is a still higher interest in such things as the contrast,
in the same Prælection, of the undeviating self-consistency of Spenser
in all his work, the bewildering apparent lack of central unity in
Shakespeare with its resolution, and the actual inconsistency of Dryden.
All the Homeric studies deserve reading, the discussion of the _Odyssey_
in _Præl._ xi. being especially noteworthy, with its culmination in that
delightful phrase about Nausicaa which we quoted in the last
volume.[1127] Particularly wise and particularly interesting is the
treatment of “Imitation” (the lower imitation) in _Præl._ xvi., where
those who are of our mystery will not fail to compare the passage with
Vida. How comfortable is it to find a poet-critic, so uncompromising on
dignity of subject, who can yet admit, and that with not the faintest
grudging, that it “is incredible how mightily the hidden fire is roused
by single words or clauses—nay, by the sound of mere syllables, that
strike the ear at a happy nick of time.”[1128] This is almost “the
doctrine of the Poetic Moment” itself, though we must not urge it too
far, and though it is brought in apropos of the suggestiveness _to
poets_ of antecedent poetic work. It is still sovereign against a still
prevailing heresy. The abundant treatment of Æschylus[1129] is also to
be carefully noted; for, as we have observed, that mighty poet had been
almost neglected during the Neo-classic period.

The second score of Lectures is still technically devoted to the
ancients, especially Pindar, the second and third Tragedians,
Theocritus, Lucretius, Virgil, and Horace; but references to the
moderns, not very rare in the first volume, become still more frequent
here, and are sometimes, as those to Spenser and Bunyan in the matter of
allegory,[1130] and the contrast of Jason and Macduff as bewailing their
children,[1131] very notable. On his narrower subject, the judgment of
Sophocles in _Præl._ xxviii. is singularly weighty; and I should like to
have heard Mr Matthew Arnold answer on behalf of his favourite. The
comparative tameness, and the want of variety and range, which some (not
all, of course) feel in the “singer and child of sweet Colonos” are here
put with authority by one whom no one could accuse of _Sturm und Drang_
preferences, or of an undisciplined thirst for novelty. Only on
Theocritus, perhaps, does Morality sit _in banco_ with Taste to a rather
disastrous effect, and the fact is curiously explicable. His disapproval
of Scott’s strong language, and his want of ecclesiastical-mindedness,
and his lenity to liquor, had not blinded Keble in the least to Scott’s
poetry; he had admitted the charitable and comfortable old plea of
“time, not man,” in favour of certain peccadilloes of Shakespeare; he
is, in fact, nowhere squeamish to silliness. But he cannot pardon
Theocritus for the _Oaristys_ and such things, simply because the new
Wordsworthian nature-worship in him is wounded and shocked
_insanabiliter_. “Like Aristophanes,” he says, “like Catullus, like
Horace, Theocritus betakes himself to the streams and the woods, not to
seek rest for a weary mind, but as provocatives for a lustful
one.”[1132] This new “sin against the Spirit” is most interesting.

On the other hand, this very nature-worship keeps his balance, where we
might have thought he would lose it, on the subject of Lucretius. He
contrasts the comparative triviality and childishness of Virgil,
agreeable enough as it is, in regard to nature, with the mystic majesty
of his great predecessor. The charges of atheism and indecency trouble
him very little:[1133] the intense earnestness, the lofty delight in
clouds and forests and the vague, the likeness to Æschylus and Dante—all
these things he fixes on, and delights in. I wish he had written more on
Dante himself; what he has[1134] is admirable.

As to Virgil in person, though sensible enough of his merits, he says
things which would have elicited the choicest combinations of
Scaligerian Billingsgate; and brings out, in a way striking and I think
rather novel, the _permolestum_, the “serious irritation” caused by the
fact that Virgil either could not or would not give Æneas any character
at all, and that you feel sometimes inclined to think that he never
himself had any clear idea what sort of a real man his hero was. This
exaltation of the Character above the Action is very noteworthy.

But, in fact, Keble always is noteworthy, and more. Mere moderns may
dismiss him, with or without a reading, as a mill-horse treader of
academic rounds. He is nothing so little. He is, in fact, almost the
first representative of the Romantic movement who has applied its spirit
to the consecrated subjects of study; and he has shown, unfortunately to
too limited a circle, how fresh, how interesting, how inspiring the
results of this and of the true comparison of ancient and modern may
be.[1135] Literary criticism—indeed literature itself as such—was with
him, it is true, only a by-work, hardly more than a pastime. But had it
been otherwise, he would, I think, twenty years before Arnold, have
given us the results of a more thorough scholarship, a reading certainly
not less wide, a taste nearly as delicate and catholic, a broader
theory, and a much greater freedom from mere crotchet and caprice.

[Sidenote: _Garbett._]

I am not quite so well acquainted with the whole work of Keble’s
successor Garbett.[1136] Elected as he was, by the anti-Tractarian
reaction, against the apparently far superior claims of Isaac Williams,
his appointment has generally been regarded as a job; and I had to
divest myself of prejudice in reading him. He has indeed nothing of his
predecessor’s serene scholarship, and little of his clear and clean
taste. His form puts him at a special disadvantage. Instead of Keble’s
pure and flowing Latinity, you find an awkward dialect, peppered after
the fashion of Cicero’s letters with Greek words, peppered still more
highly with notes of exclamation, and, worst of all, full of words, and
clauses, and even whole sentences, in capitals, to the destruction of
all repose and dignity. He seems to have simply printed each Prælection
as he gave it (the pagings are independent), and then to have batched
them together without revision in volume form.[1137] But one cannot read
far or fairly without perceiving that, either before his election or
after it, Garbett had taken the pains to qualify by a serious study of
antecedent criticism—a study, it may be added, of which there is hardly
any trace in Keble. Garbett devotes especial attention to Longinus and
Dryden; and though I do not (as I have formerly hinted)[1138] agree with
him in regard to either,[1139] it is beyond all doubt that he had made a
distinct and original attempt to grasp both as critics. He deals with
Horace, of course; but it is noteworthy that he has again aimed at a
systematic and fresh view, taking Horace as the master of “Art Poetic,”
and comparing Boileau, &c. He has an abundant discussion of Scaliger,
whom he takes as third type and (rightly) as the father of classical
French criticism, while Dryden gives him his fourth. He knows the
Germans—not merely Lessing and Goethe, but Kant; and whatever the
failures in his execution, he can “satisfy the examiners” not merely
from the point of view of those who demand acquaintance with the history
and literature of the subject, but from that of those who postpone
everything to what they think philosophy. He refers to the climatic view
of literature,[1140] constantly combines historical and literary
considerations, and is altogether a “modern.” As has been said, I
disagree with him more often than I agree; but I do not think there can
be any serious denial of the fact that he was worthy of the Chair and of
a place here.

[Sidenote: _Claughton._]

The tenure of his successor Claughton, afterwards Bishop, was but for a
single term; and he seems to have left little memorial of it except a
singularly elegant Latin address on the appointment of Lord Derby as
Chancellor. Elegance, indeed, was Claughton’s characteristic as an
orator,[1141] but I should not imagine that he had much strength or very
wide or keen literary knowledge and enthusiasm. Of Mr. Arnold we have
spoken.

[Sidenote: _Doyle._]

There were foolish folk, not without some excuse of ignorance (if that
ever _be_ an excuse) for their foolishness, who grumbled or scoffed when
he was followed by Sir Francis Doyle. There had been some hopes of
Browning, which had been foiled—if by nothing else—by the discovery that
an Honorary M.A. degree was not a qualification; and it must be owned
that curiosity to see what Browning would do _in_ prose _on_ poetry was
highly legitimate. Moreover, the younger generation was busy with Mr.
Swinburne and Mr. Morris, who had not turned Tennyson and Browning
himself out, and they knew little of Sir Francis. Better informed
persons, however, reported of him as of an Oxford man of the best old
type of “scholar and gentleman,” a person of very shrewd wits, of
probably greater practical experience than any Professor of Poetry had
ever had, and the author of certain things like _The Red Thread of
Honour_ and _The Private of the Buffs_, which, in their own peculiar
style and division, were poetry _sans phrase_. The report was justified
by the new Professor’s Lectures.[1142] They are frankly exoteric; but
they are saved by scholarship from the charge of ever being popular in
the bad sense. They adopt as frankly, and carry a little farther, that
plan of making the lectures, if not exactly reviews of particular books
new and old, at any rate _causeries_ hung on particular texts and pegs,
which the vernacularisation of the Chair had made inevitable, and to
which Matthew Arnold himself had inclined gladly enough. They are,
though not in the least degree slipshod or slovenly, quite
conversational in style. But they deserve, I think, no mean place among
the documents of the Chair. Their easy, well-bred common-sense, kept
from being really Philistine (which epithet Sir Francis good-humouredly
accepted), not merely by their good breeding, but by the aforesaid
scholarship, by natural acuteness, and by an intense unaffected love for
poetry, might not be a good staple. But if the electors could manage to
let it come round again, as an exception, once in a generation or so, it
would be well, and better than well.

[Sidenote: _Shairp._]

Of Principal Shairp so many good men have said so many good things that
it is almost unnecessary to add, in this special place and context, the
praise (which can be given ungrudgingly) that he has always, in his
critical work, had before him good intentions and high ideals. Much
further addition, I fear, cannot be made. When I read his question, “Did
not Shakespeare hate and despise Iago and Edmund?”[1143] when I remember
how Shakespeare himself put in the mouth of the one—

                    “I bleed, sir, but not killed”;

in the mouth of the other—

              “The wheel is come full circle; I am here”;

and—

                       “Yet Edmund was beloved,”

I own I sympathise with an unconventional and unsophisticated soul who,
once reading this same utterance of Mr. Shairp’s, rose, strode about the
room, and sitting down, ejaculated, “What are you to do? What are you to
say? Where are you to go? when a Professor of Poetry, uttering such
things in Oxford, is not taken out, and stoned or burnt forthwith,
between Balliol and the _Randolph_?” And there is an only less dreadful
passage[1144] of miscomprehension on the magnificent close of Tennyson’s
“Love and Duty”—one of the greatest examples of the difficult
“_Versöhnung_ close,” the reconciliation of art, the relapse into peace.

But the lesson of criticism is a lesson of tolerance. A complete and
careful perusal of Mr Shairp’s _Aspects of Poetry_, and of his other
books, will indeed show that the _apices_ of criticism, whether
historical, or appreciative, or even philosophical, were beyond his
climb. He shows that constant necessity or temptation of engaging in
comment—eulogistic or controversial—upon the _ephemera critica_ of the
time, which has been one of the worst results of the change of the
lectures from Latin to English. You could not, in the stately old
vehicle, do more than occasionally decline upon such a lower level as
this. Mr Shairp is always citing and fencing with (or extolling
reviewer-fashion) Arnold or Bagehot, Hutton or Myers. _Quotidiana
quotidie moriuntur_; and, though no doubt it saves much trouble to
Professors if they can take out of a newspaper or a review, or even a
recent book, on their way to Oxford, a text for an hour’s sermon, their
state _sub specie æternitatis_ is far from the more gracious. Oxford is
constantly making new statutes now; I think one forbidding any citation
from this Chair of critical or creative literature less than thirty
years old would not be bad.

More happy, if not always more critical, were his dealings with things
Scottish, where sympathy lifted him out of the peddling, and transformed
the parochial. On Burns (even though there must have been searchings of
heart there) he could sometimes, though by no means always, speak
excellently; on Scott superexcellently; on Wordsworth almost as well; on
the Highland poets (if we do not forget our salt-cellar) best of all,
because he spoke with knowledge and not as Mr Arnold. His work is always
amiable, often admirable: I wish I could say that it is always or often
critical.[1145]

[Sidenote: _Palgrave._]

The great achievement of Mr Shairp’s successor, Francis Turner Palgrave,
in regard to literary criticism, is an indirect one, and had been mostly
done years and decades before he was elected to the Chair. Indeed, I
think little if anything was given to the world as the direct result of
his professorial work. As an actual critic or reviewer, Palgrave was no
doubt distinguished not over-favourably by that tendency to “splash” and
_tapage_ of manner which he shared with Kinglake and some other writers
of the mid-nineteenth century, and which has been recently revived. But
his real taste was in a manner warranted by his friendships; and his
friendships must almost have kept him right if he had had less taste. He
may have profited largely by these friendships in the composition of the
two parts of that really _Golden Treasury_, which, if it does not
achieve the impossible in giving everybody what he wants, all that he
wants, and nothing that he does not want, is by general confession the
most successful attempt in a quite appallingly difficult kind. The
second part, which has of course been the most criticised, seems to me
even more remarkable than the first, as showing an almost complete
freedom from one easily besetting sin, the tendency not to relish styles
that have come in since the critic “commenced” in criticism.

[Sidenote: Salutantur vivi.]

Of the late and the present holders of the Chair we are happily
precluded from speaking critically. May the bar not soon be lifted!

-----

Footnote 1105:

  Of Whitfield (or Whit_feld_, as some write) I have found nothing but
  that he wrote some Latin verses on William the Third. The second
  volume of William Hawkins’s _Tracts_ (1758) contains, besides a
  ridiculous tragedy, _Henry and Rosamond_, an _Essay on Drama_,
  principally occupied by carpings at Mason’s _Elfrida_, and some
  Letters on Pope’s Commentary on Homer—very small critical beer. About
  Wheeler I find less even than about Whitfield. The piety of his son
  published—long after date and in our own times—1870—the _Prælections_
  of John Randolph, a man who, besides holding several other
  professorships at Oxford, attained to eminence in the Church, and died
  Bishop of London in 1813. They are very sober and respectable. There
  is in poetry a _non contemnenda proprietas quod imitando præcipiat_;
  and the warning, _non aliunde artis suæ rudimenta desumet Criticus
  nisi ex sanæ Logices præceptis_, might with advantage have been
  observed oftener than it has been. But Randolph sticks in the bark and
  the letter. Holmes, a poet after a fashion, a theologian, and what
  not, seems to have written more freely on anything than on criticism.

Footnote 1106:

  He complies with the requirements of method and fashion by dealing
  _generally_ with the End and Usefulness of Poetry, its Kinds and so
  forth. But all this we have had a thousand times. What we have here
  specially is a comparison, and a new comparison.

Footnote 1107:

  Vol. i. p. 57 _sq._

Footnote 1108:

  Southey, himself a proper moral man in all conscience, but a sensible
  one withal, somewhere remarks, “said well but not wisely” on Hurdis’s

                                     “Give me the steed
               Whose generous efforts bore the prize away,
               I care not for his grandsire or his dam.”

  A mild echo of the revolutionary period!

Footnote 1109:

  In a review in the _British Critic_ (1814), reprinted in _Papers and
  Reviews_, Oxford and London, 1877.

Footnote 1110:

  See the _Remains_, edited by his son. London, 1871.

Footnote 1111:

  First published at the end of his tenure in 1813. My copy is the 2nd
  ed., Oxford, 1828.

Footnote 1112:

  See remarks on Trapp, pp. 6 and 7 ed. cit.

Footnote 1113:

  _V._ pp. 187, 197, 390, 229, 177.

Footnote 1114:

  Keble, however, was right in specifying the chief exception—the
  admirable prælection on _Epitaphs_ (No. 27, p. 340).

Footnote 1115:

  This is all the more tantalising in that his definition of _Judicium_
  in _Præl._ 2 seems to promise nothing less than an inquiry into the
  critical and appreciative faculty as regards Poetry.

Footnote 1116:

  _V._ vol. i.

Footnote 1117:

  London, 1826.

Footnote 1118:

  See Beddoes’ _Letters_ (ed. Gosse, London, 1894), p. 68: “Mr Milman
  (our poetry professor) has made me quite unfashionable here by
  denouncing me as one of a ‘villainous school.’” These Letters are
  crammed with matter of literary and critical interest. I was much
  tempted to give them a place in the text as illustrating the critical
  opinions of a person in whom great wits and madness were rather
  blended than allied; in the transition generation—the _mezzanine_
  floor—of 1800-1830.

Footnote 1119:

  _Prælectiones Academicæ Oxonii habitæ annis_ 1832-41. Oxford, 1844. 2
  vols., but continuously paged.

Footnote 1120:

  _Occasional Papers and Reviews_, by John Keble, M.A. Oxford and
  London, 1877.

Footnote 1121:

  _Occ. Pap._, p. 62.

Footnote 1122:

  The place most perilously aleatory is the fling in _Occ. Pap._, p. 87,
  at “Mr Leigh Hunt _and his miserable followers_.”

Footnote 1123:

   _Occ. Pap._, p. 6.

Footnote 1124:

  Ibid., p. 150.

Footnote 1125:

  Ibid., pp. 98-102.

Footnote 1126:

  Those who make the contrast will, however, I think, find out that
  Arnold owes more to his forerunner than might be gathered from his
  published lectures.

Footnote 1127:

  P. 312.

Footnote 1128:

  _Præl. Ac._, p. 281.

Footnote 1129:

  It occupies seven Prælections (xvii.-xxiii.) and some 200 pages.

Footnote 1130:

  ii. 415.

Footnote 1131:

  ii. 586.

Footnote 1132:

  ii. 641. He has a liking for Horace; but objects to him (not quite
  unreasonably) as _sordidior quidem_ in his Epicureanism, when you
  compare him with Lucretius.

Footnote 1133:

  He allows him, as well as Byron and Shelley, the plea of _vix compos_
  in certain respects.

Footnote 1134:

  ii. 678 _sq._ and elsewhere.

Footnote 1135:

   I pass, as needless to dwell on at length, the excellence of his
  style and expression in these lectures. “So acute in remark, so
  beautiful in language,” as Newman says in the letter printed in _Occ.
  Pap._, p. xii. _sq._

Footnote 1136:

  My only _possession_ is _De Re Critica Prælectiones_. Oxford, 1847.

Footnote 1137:

  My copy, which is “from the author” to some one unknown, has not a few
  pen-corrections, apparently in his own hand.

Footnote 1138:

  Vol. ii. p. 372.

Footnote 1139:

  It is particularly unfortunate that he has endeavoured to construct a
  theory of Longinus as a statesman-critic, comparing him with Burke. I
  have already said that I do not think the identification of the author
  of the book with Zenobia’s prime minister in the least disproved or
  (with the materials at present at disposal) disprovable: but it
  certainly is not proved to the point of serving as basis to such a
  theory.

Footnote 1140:

  With reference to Schlegel and Madame de Staël.

Footnote 1141:

  His sermons have been disrespectfully spoken of; but I think unjustly.
  I heard them myself in pretty close juxtaposition with those of Pusey
  and Wilberforce, and even with the, in both senses, rare discourses of
  Mansel. In vigour and body they were nowhere beside any of these; but
  they could fairly hold their own in the softer ways of style.

Footnote 1142:

  First Series (comprising the “Inaugural,” with two others on
  “Provincial Poetry” and _The Dream of Gerontius_), London, 1869. A
  second appeared in 1877.

Footnote 1143:

  _Aspects of Poetry_ (London, 1881), p. 30.

Footnote 1144:

  Ibid., p. 157.

Footnote 1145:

  How entirely _un_critical he was may be judged from the fact that he
  brackets Voltaire and Diderot as apostles of the _Aufklärung_ in an
  anti-Romantic sense.


                              APPENDIX II.

                          AMERICAN CRITICISM.

AN ATTEMPT IN OUTLINE ONLY—ITS DIFFICULTIES— THE EARLY STAGES—THE
    ORIGINS AND PIONEERS— TICKNOR—LONGFELLOW—EMERSON—POE— LOWELL: HIS
    GENERAL POSITION—‘AMONG MY BOOKS’— ‘MY STUDY WINDOWS‘—‘ESSAYS ON THE
    ENGLISH POETS’— LAST ESSAYS—O. W. HOLMES—THE WHOLE DUTY OF CRITICS
    STATED BY HIM _IN ALIA MATERIA_— WHITMAN AND THE “DEMOCRATIC” IDEAL—
    MARGARET FULLER— RIPLEY—WHIPPLE—LANIER.


[Sidenote: _An attempt in outline only._]

I am very well aware of the arguments which may be advanced against
attempting to extend our survey of criticism across the Atlantic. I at
least do not undervalue the apparently formal, but in truth real,
objection that we have undertaken _European_ criticism only: while I
appreciate the opposite demur, that the space of an appendix is as
uncomplimentary and as uncomplementary as total exclusion would be. But
after having taken counsel of more than one American friend, by no means
specially Anglophile in temper, I found that, apparently, the inclusion
even in this form would be at least sometimes taken in the spirit in
which it is meant, while on the other hand I had myself felt very
strongly the disadvantage of excluding such a critic as Mr Lowell, who
has all the characteristics of the best of our own with an inviting
_differentia_. The bursting-point, however, of this volume is pretty
nearly reached; and I must again observe that there is no invidious
intention in the proportion of the notice. I have endeavoured to allot
to Mr Lowell himself a space (allowing for differences of scale and
type) not, I think, unfair in proportion to his English fellows; others
I have had to survey more in summary. But I hope that the whole may at
any rate provide a not inadequate outline-sketch of the subject; and in
this hope I submit it, not merely to English readers, but to those still
more nearly concerned, from some of whom this book has received
attention at once of the most candid (in the better pre-Sheridanian
sense of that word) and of the most searchingly competent.

[Sidenote: _Its difficulties._]

The difficulties of the task are complicated by the necessity, according
to our plan, of omitting living writers. The history of American
criticism appears, even more than that of other departments of
literature, to be very mainly a history of the present; and I could
write _ex abundanti_ on that. The “middle distance” is also well
provided. But the origins are singularly obscure, and appear to be
regarded with neither pride nor interest by Americans themselves. When I
thought of this excursus first, some years ago, I was referred by an
American friend to two articles[1146] which had appeared not long before
in _The International Monthly_ on “American Literary Criticism and the
Doctrine of Evolution.” The title gave me some forebodings in its
doubleness; yet this might be interpreted favourably, for how can you
treat the “evolution” of a subject without treating its history? I
found, however, that the author, though his papers lacked neither
thought nor style, was wholly occupied with the doctrine of evolutionary
criticism generally, as against judicial and appreciative; and that he
did not even propose to meddle with the history of his subject save by
occasional allusion. The histories of American literature have afforded
me something more, but not much.

[Sidenote: _The early stages._]

I do not mention this in any spirit of fault-finding, for few people are
less likely than myself to need reminding that in literary and critical
history, as elsewhere, you cannot make bricks without straw, and still
less without clay. There was, and there could be, little attempt at
important criticism in “colonial” times, and the immense material
expansion of the earlier Republican period was very little more
favourable to it than the quiescence and dependence of the
Monarchical.[1147]

The definite entrance of the United States into the society of nations,
after the second war with England and the settlement of Europe by the
final suppression of Napoleon, as necessarily brought with it the
organisation of critical as of other employment for the intellect.
[Sidenote: _The origins and pioneers._] There is something agreeably
Arcadian in the idea of Longfellow, a boy of nineteen, being sent to
Europe by the trustees of his college to qualify himself for a Chair of
Literature; but the fact is no more and no less creditable to these
functionaries than it is symbolic of the new tendencies of the time.
Still, Longfellow was not actually the apostle of comparative and
extensive criticism in America. Ticknor, his elder by eighteen years,
had, partly no doubt by this very fact of the admission of his country
to the full franchise of nations, been induced to give up the study and
practice of the law, and to devote himself to literature, in the very
year of Waterloo itself. And he too, after a sojourn in Europe, became,
some years before his fellow at Bowdoin, Professor of Modern Languages
and Belles Lettres at Harvard. Emerson, born between the two, was a
little later in treading the same road than either, but he trod it; and
his visit to Europe, in 1833, determined the critical writings and
lectures which followed.

These three I should take to be the founders of American criticism of
the adult and accomplished kind, and they represent it, interestingly
enough, in three different ways. It is true that no one of them is first
of all a critic, or even, as Mr. Lowell was afterwards, a critic in
power at least equal to that of any other of his qualities. But this was
only in the nature of things.

[Sidenote: _Ticknor._]

It is not merely because Ticknor’s lifework was a literary history that
one may call him first of all a literary historian. The fact that the
_History of Spanish Literature_, more than fifty years after its
publication, and nearly seventy after its inception, although the
interval has been one of the fiercest in pursuing, and one of the most
voluminous in recording, literary explorations, retains, and is likely
to retain, its position not merely as a classic, but as an authority,
shows some pre-established harmony between writer and task. Yet, though
the provinces of the literary historian and the critic overlap to a very
large extent,—though the historian who is not a critic must be a mere
reference-monger, and the critic who is not a historian a mere
bellettrist,—yet there are skirts and fringes of each province which are
not necessarily part of the other. Ticknor is rather less of a critic
than he is of a historian—his grouping of facts, his investigation and
statement of them, his perception of origins and connections, are all a
little superior to his appreciation pure and simple. Yet there are few
who can afford to look down on him in this latter respect; and as
historical critic and critical historian I do not know where to look for
his superior, while I should have very soon done looking for his equals.

[Sidenote: _Longfellow._]

Longfellow (for it will be convenient to take Emerson last) shows us, as
a matter of course, a different critical phase. He never, so far as I
know, wrote any connected study of literature, and I do not think that
it would have been very good if he had. His lectures, which were
necessarily numerous, and the articles which he wrote (I believe in no
small numbers) have never taken any important position, and again I
should doubt whether, if we had them or more of them, anything very
remarkable would be included.[1148] Yet he had, and displayed in the
intensest degree, that most agreeable and not least profitable function
of the critical faculty which attaches itself to literature, assimilates
it, transforms it into instruction and delight. This is noticeable in
almost every page of his poems: it is the very genesis of many of them,
and perhaps of the best of them: it is at once the explanation and the
refutation of the charge of want of originality brought against him. So
in his prose. _Hyperion_ and _Outre-Mer_ are permeated and saturated
with it. The literature of Germany, the literature of Spain, have done
more than colour the poet’s or prose-writer’s work; they have penetrated
to its substance, fed it, been digested and absorbed into its very life.
From _The Golden Legend_ and _The Spanish Student_ to the smallest
fragments this process is noteworthy. And while it shows, on the part of
the writer himself, processes necessary to the critic, in intenser and
more poetic form, it performs on the reader “the office of the critic”—
his hierophantic, initiating, inoculating office—in the most vivid and
forcible manner and degree. No one who, susceptible to literature, but
more or less ignorant of it, reads Longfellow but must, consciously or
unconsciously, imbibe something of literature itself—of a literature far
wider and deeper than that which the poet (though I speak as a lifelong
lover of Longfellow’s poetry) himself creates.

[Sidenote: _Emerson._]

That Emerson also is not first of all a critic is not surprising,
because, as most people have seen, Emerson is not, first of all,
anything but Emerson. But he is in some ways more of a critic than
either of the others, and the reason why he is not more so still is
that, like his master or analogue Carlyle, he rather refuses to look on
literature as literature. His ethical preoccupations and his
transcendentalism alike prevent him from doing this—he is Carlyle _plus_
Vinet. In the second place, if I may say so without offence, he shows
us, as neither Ticknor nor Longfellow, both of whom were too
cosmopolitan, shows us, the American touch-me-not-ishness, the somewhat
unnecessary affectation of nationality. The literary chauvinism of the
famous lecture on “The American Scholar” is perhaps more apparent than
real; but his query, “Who is Southey?” in the record of his interview
with Landor, is awkward. “Southey is, say what you like about his poetry
or his politics, one of the greatest _men of letters_ of all time,” is
the answer which a critic should have given to himself. Yet there is
much good positive criticism in Emerson (if there can be said to be
anything positive in him), and there is still more of that vague
stimulative force which is so noticeable in these first great writers of
America, and which is so interesting when we consider their
circumstances, individual and national. In the _English Traits_ and the
_Representative Men_, in the lectures and elsewhere, there is always
ringing to the fit ear the “_Tolle, lege!_” of the greater critics, with
the comment which helps to make the book understood, when it is taken up
and read.

[Sidenote: _Poe._]

By the ’Thirties and ’Forties of the nineteenth century the European
pilgrimage was no longer necessary to fetch the critical spark home.
American criticism became abundant, and not merely abundant. In no case
do I so much regret the necessity of compression as in that of Poe. The
extreme and almost incomprehensible injustice with which the ill-fated
author of _Ligeia_ and _The Haunted Palace_ was so long treated by his
countrymen has, I believe, abated; and I have seen, in the article
referred to, a complimentary, though merely passing, reference to him as
a critic. But there is still room, I think, for some substantial
_Rettung_, as Lessing would have said. The substance would have to be
considerable, for the matter under consideration,[1149] which is not
small in bulk, is heterogeneous, and even to some extent chaotic. More
than any other part of Poe’s work it is the scapegoat of his
unfavourable circumstances, of his patchy education, of his weaknesses
in conduct, temper, and constitution. A great deal is mere hack-writing—
_chaînes de l’esclavage_—stuff never meant to abide the steady judgment
of posterity. You may, if you please, pick out of it the most amazing
things, such[1150] as that “for one Fouqué there are fifty Molières” (I
am no undervaluer of Fouqué, but I wish—I _do_ wish—that I knew where to
look for even one of the forty-nine additional Poquelins); and “for one
Dickens ... five million ... Fieldings,” where perhaps five million
marks of exclamation might not inadequately meet the case. Generous as
is the praise which he heaps upon Mrs Browning and Mr Horne; true as
much of what he says is; one feels that his observations want
_reducing_, adjusting, co-ordinating under the calmer influence of
comparative and universal criticism. There was not the slightest reason
why he should get into such a frantic rage with, the “devilled kidneys”
(a most pleasant and wholesome food) in that very pleasant and wholesome
book _Charles O’Malley_; or why he should have so furiously resented Mr
Lowell’s remarks on himself in the _Fable for Critics_, open as these
are to criticism; or why he should have said or done a hundred other
things of the kind. His “hungry heart and burning,” his ill-disciplined
intellect and temper, drove him in all sorts of directions, and not
unfrequently in the wrong ones.

Yet his critical instincts were almost always right; and not seldom they
were remarkably original. Considering what the ways of poets are, and
that Poe had his full share of the then prevailing American soreness
towards “British” writers, I know few things in literature more pleasant
and edifying at once than his enthusiastic and intelligent welcome of
Tennyson. “The Rationale of Verse,” though there are faults in it, due
to ignorance or carelessness in terminology, to haste, and to imperfect
reading, is one of the best things ever written on English prosody, and
quite astonishingly original. Although, when he takes a great deal of
pains it is apt to be rather lost labour, as, for instance, in the
comically laborious dissection of Longfellow’s _Spanish Student_ (a
delightful thing if taken in the proper way), the acuteness which he
often shows even in such pieces, and much more in his lighter _aperçus_,
is remarkable. The _Marginalia_ are full of good things—I find, after
reading them anew for this purpose, that my reference slips “stand like
the corn arow.” His dislike of German criticism[1151] may have been half
opposition to Carlyle, between whom and himself there was a gulf fixed;
and he should not have said that Macaulay had more true critical spirit
than both the Schlegels put together. But this very passage is worth
pondering, and it was very bold at the time. I do not think he borrowed
the true observation of the resemblance between _Hudibras_ and the
_Satyre Menippée_.[1152] His defence of the “rhetorician’s rules”[1153]
is just and lively: it is not a little noteworthy that he, the most
apparently irregular and spasmodic of men of genius, perfectly
understands the importance of Form.

And all this, let it be remembered, was written, not merely in distress,
and in disease, and sometimes in despair, but—to adapt the Dickensian
and Gautieresque juxtaposition—in the ’Thirties and 'Forties, when, as
we have seen, criticism in England itself had fallen into the state from
which it was aroused by Matthew Arnold years after Poe’s death; when
Carlyle was turning his back on it, when Macaulay was acknowledging that
he was not the man for it, when the men who meddled with it were showing
absolute want of comprehension of Tennyson, and passing Browning over as
beneath their notice. It was written in spite of the bad influence
(discernible enough, as it is, in Poe) of the swaggering, swashbuckler
fashion of “British” criticism itself. It was written before—long before
in most cases—Lowell came to his maturity as a critic. It is, except in
flashes and indications, mostly a might-have-been. But that
might-have-been, translated into fact, would, I think, have ranked with
the most noteworthy critical achievements that we possess in regard to
poetry and _belles-lettres_. On other departments Poe could probably
never, in the most favourable circumstances, have laid much hold. But in
his own sphere he not only did the works, but knew those who did them
and how they were done.

[Sidenote: _Lowell: his general position._]

On the whole, however, I suppose that a majority of the best judges
would award the place of premier critic of America to Mr Lowell, and I
should certainly not attempt to contest the judgment. He had, in an
eminent degree, most of the qualities which our long examination has
enabled us to specify as generally found in good critics; catholic and
observant reading, real enthusiasm for literature, sanity of judgment,
good-humour, width of view, and (though this perhaps in rather less
measure than the others) methodic arrangement and grasp. He was free,
not merely from the defects which are the opposites of these good
qualities, but from others—the niggling and carping of the
gerund-grinder and the _gradus_-hunter,[1154] the hideboundness of the
type-and-kind critic, and above all the incomprehensible and yet
all-pervading inability to like something because it is not something
else. He could put his perceptions brightly and forcibly—in a way
perhaps rather tempting to re-read than at once sinking into the memory,
but not the less excellent, and perhaps (in criticism) rather the more
uncommon, for that.

On the wrong side of the account there are of course some things to put.
I shall not be suspected of wishing to banish quips and cranks from
criticism, but Mr Lowell was perhaps a little too prodigal of them. His
patriotism was a little aggressive—not in the way (which he had far too
much critical good sense ever to tread) of overvaluing his countrymen’s
literary performances, but in too often infusing into his criticism a
sort of _Nemo-me-impune-lacessit_ flavour which was quite unnecessary,
and in fact almost entirely irrelevant. And lastly, as has been hinted
above, his grasp was not always sure. To compare the two papers on Gray,
written at no great interval of time, by him and by his slightly younger
contemporary Mr Arnold, is very interesting and instructive. I am not
sure that, if it were just (or indeed possible) to extract separate good
critical things, like nuggets, from the two essays, and weigh the
parcels against each other, the American would not prove the richer,
even allowing weight for length. But Gray is not “put” in the Harvard
man’s essay as he is in the Oxonian’s: the critical contact is less full
and vital, the congress less complete. It may be urged, indeed, that the
selection is not quite fair, because of the unusual sympathy, and as it
were harmony pre-established, between the Graian and the Arnoldian
temperaments; but the same slight shortcoming will be found
elsewhere.[1155]

[Sidenote: Among my Books.]

Mr Lowell’s best known book of literary criticism is, no doubt, _Among
my Books_; but though it shows his method characteristically enough, it
is by no means mainly bookish: in fact, I think there is rather less in
it about the literary part of the matter than in others. The famous
essay on “Dryden” is of course a standard, and perhaps its author’s
diploma-piece as a critic; and the “Shakespeare once More” (a title
suggested by Goethe) is a very interesting literary _pot-pourri_. But
the “Lessing” and the “Rousseau” are chiefly biographical; and such
papers as “Witchcraft” and “New England,” attractive as they are, are
from the literary point of view quite “off,” as literary slang has it.
There is nothing to object to in this, for the general title covers
subjects suggested by books, or the subjects of books, quite as amply as
books-by-themselves-books; and there can be no doubt that the reader
usually likes the others best. But the whole volume shows its author
well as a scholar but not a pedant, a man of letters who is also a man
of the world, and a judge who, though by no means ideally impartial, and
even with a tolerably well-stuffed portfolio of prejudices, can give
judgments not to be pooh-poohed at the worst, and at the best things
worthy to take their place with the best of judge-made law in our
subject.

[Sidenote: My Study Windows.]

The equally well-known _My Study Windows_ does not contain, as the title
may seem to intimate, matter of _more_ mixed quality as regards pure
literature, but the quality is still mixed. Mr Lowell was not happy in
his reception of the avatar of Mr Swinburne: it is indeed so rare for a
man of more than middle age to be quite at focus with a new poet, that
some of the wiser or more pusillanimous of our kind decline in such
cases to register a formal judgment. The “Carlyle” is much tainted by
political prejudice, though it does credit to Mr Lowell’s perspicacity
to have so early found out in Carlyle that real “Toryism” which was so
long mistaken. But the “Chaucer” and the “Pope”—differ here and there
with them as we may or must—are solid and substantive contributions to
the main shelf of criticism; while in the lower ranges “The Life and
Letters of James Gates Perceval” only needed more quotation and more
ruthlessness to make it a pendant to Macaulay’s “Montgomery.”

[Sidenote: Essays on the English Poets.]

The Essays which have been reprinted in England, with the permission of
Mr Lowell and with a Preface by his own hands, as _Essays on the English
Poets_[1156] (including those on Lessing and Rousseau as a very welcome
though not exceedingly relevant bonus or make-weight), are partly drawn
from the two books just noticed. Some of them seem to have been written
rather early; most were originally lectures to a university, and may
have a little sacrificed literature to instruction. The best by a good
deal is, I think, the “Wordsworth,”[1157] which, though there are many
good essays on Wordsworth to make up for the many bad ones, deserves to
rank almost with the best. It is seldom that in a single essay one finds
such a capital specimen of delicate appreciation as the comparison of
the fall of Goethe’s _Ueber allen Gipfeln_ to “blossoms shaken down by a
noonday breeze on turf”; so good an example of the criticism of epigram
as “Wordsworth is the historian of Wordsworthshire”;[1158] and so fine
and just a critical simile as the comparison of Milton’s verse to a
mixed fleet of men-of-war and merchantmen, which comes shortly after.
The “Milton” itself has more to do with Milton’s editor and biographer
than with Milton, and is marred by that curious impatience of a reasoned
prosody which appears in Mr Lowell so often. So is the Spenser—quite
admirable in great part of it—by the author’s well-known and excessive
depreciation of fifteenth- and early sixteenth-century poetry.[1159] The
“Keats” leaves off just when we are expecting the critic to begin. As if
to carry out unity of cross-purpose, if of nothing more, the “Lessing”
hardly says anything about Lessing’s criticism, and the “Rousseau” is
chiefly about Rousseau as a man. But though, putting the “Wordsworth”
aside, the contents of the volume would hardly have given us a fair idea
of Mr Lowell’s critical powers by themselves, it could have been written
by no bad critic as a whole, and in part could only have been written by
a very good one.

[Sidenote: _Last Essays._]

As nearly always, too, this critic’s last work is of his best. The
“Gray” we have noticed. The “Landor” is mainly, though not wholly,
personal; and the “Walton,” as a “Walton” must be and ought to be,
rather of life rather than of literature. But the paper on the
_Areopagitica_ is an admirable piece, and “On the Study of Modern
Languages” stands, I think, alone among the arguments on its side,
distinguished at once by competent knowledge and judicial fairness in
regard to ancient and modern alike.

So much critical gift, indeed, of so wide a range and so happy in its
display, is seldom to be found. And though nothing is more impertinent
than to recommend a representative to a constituency to which you do not
yourself belong, I think that perhaps these volumes may give me the
right to say that if I were an American I should vote for Mr Lowell, and
that whatever might be my nationality I should say “Well done!” if he
were elected.

[Sidenote: _O. W. Holmes._]

To pass to yet another of the same distinguished group. There is, though
a great deal of indirect, not much direct criticism in the omniform and
(when the writer could keep the cant of anti-cant out) almost always
agreeable trilogy of the _Breakfast-Table_. But there is one
passage[1160] in the last of the three which, with hardly an alteration,
is so admirable and final a description of the duty of the critic
himself that I must borrow it with some slight interlineations. These, I
am sure, Dr Holmes—if only as to a brother member of the Rabelais Club
of pleasant memory—would not have refused me:—

[Sidenote: _The whole duty of critics stated by him_ in alia materia.]

  “Now the present case, as the (critic)/doctor sees it, is just exactly
  such a collection of paltry individual facts as never was before—a
  snarl and tangle of special conditions out of which it is his business
  to wind as much thread as he can. It is a good deal as when a painter
  goes to take the portrait of any sitter who happens to send for him.
  He has seen just such noses, and just such eyes, and just such mouths:
  but he never saw exactly such a face before, and his business is with
  that and no other person’s—with the features of the worthy father of a
  family before him, and not with the portraits he has seen in
  galleries, or books, or Mr Copley’s grand pictures of the fine old
  Tories, or the Apollos and Jupiters of Greek sculpture. It is the same
  with (critic’s subject)/the patient. His (production)/disease has
  features of its own; there never was and never will be another case in
  all respects exactly like it. If a (critic)/doctor has science without
  common-sense he treats a (book)/fever, but not this man’s
  (book)/fever. If he has common-sense without science he treats this
  man’s (book)/fever without knowing the general laws that govern (books
  and all literature)/all fevers and all vital movements.”

Which thing let it be frontlet and wristlet to whosoever meddles with
criticism.

[Sidenote: _Whitman and the “Democratic” ideal._]

The poet who seems to some possibly rash non-American persons to divide
with Poe the prize due to the worthiest in American poetry, was also a
critic—less of the professional kind, much more _borné_, but more
concentrated, and in some ways more influential. The critical views of
Walt Whitman are scattered all over his not inconsiderable works, but
are to be found brought together and marshalled most aggressively in his
prose _Democratic Vistas_, with their “General Notes,” and in the
_numeris lege solutis_ of the _Song of the Exposition_. According to
these views, though Whitman speaks of individual writers (not merely
Shakespeare but even Scott) with warm admiration, and with nothing of
the curious blindness which has characterised some of his followers in
the line, “English literature is not great” because it is
anti-Democratic and Feudal. These “Notes” must develop something quite
different, and of the nature of an antidote. All “warrior epics” are
“void, inanimate, passed,” and so forth. The expression of this is
often, as Whitman’s expression constantly is, admirable, and the temper
of it is always intentionally wholesome and generous. If I regard it as
hopelessly bad criticism, it is not (to repeat the refrain once more)
because I disagree with its conclusions, but because it seems to me to
start from a hopelessly wrong principle, and to proceed on hopelessly
mistaken methods. That principle and those methods, _mutatis mutandis_,
would justify _me_ in dismissing—nay, would force me to dismiss—as void,
inanimate, worthless, mischievous, something of Heine, much of Shelley,
more of Hugo, and very nearly the whole of Whitman himself—four poets in
four different countries born, whom, as it happens, if I were the
responsible literary adviser of a new King Arthur of Poetry, I should
bid him summon among the very first to his Round Table. To the critic,
as I understand criticism (and if I may adapt a famous text of
Scripture), Feudalism is nothing and Democracy is nothing, but the
Spirit of Literature. Whitman did not think so, and unfortunately his
ideas (which may have been partly suggested by Emerson) have found
followers who have not always mellowed and antidoted the crude poison of
theory with the generous wine of temperament and expression.

Of the remarkable, if somewhat abortive, “Transcendental” group in the
latter part of the first half of the nineteenth century, George Ripley
and Margaret Fuller seem to call for notice here: as specimens of later
writers, Whipple and Sidney Lanier may suffice, in the impossibility of
including a considerable _numerus_.[1161]

[Sidenote: _Margaret Fuller._]

The critical writings of the Marchesa Ossoli are, I suppose, chiefly
contained in the volumes of her works entitled _Art, Literature, and
Drama_, and _Life Without and Life Within_. They have much interest, and
I think deserve the position assigned to her[1162] as the first American
woman who had regularly trained for criticism, and as being in a way the
chief of all such to the present day. They have, however, certain
characteristics which perhaps might be anticipated. The merely silly
reproach of transcendentalism leaves “Margaret” unscathed. She does not
talk nonsense. But she does talk a little vaguely and loosely; and it
does seem rather difficult for her to keep her eye steadily on any one
object. We know that she will overvalue Goethe; it was, as we have
pointed out, the very form and pressure of the time that made her do so,
and probably to no country was the gospel according to Wolfgang a more
powerful and beneficent gospel than to the United States of America in
the second quarter of the nineteenth century. But when we read, _in
English_, that “the frail Philina, graceful though contemptible,
presents the degradation incident to an attempt at leading an
exclusively poetic life,” or that “not even in Shakespeare” has she
“felt the organising power of genius as in” Ottilie of the
_Wahlverwandtschaften_, we think a great deal more than there is room or
necessity here to say. The article on Poe’s Poems is very curious; the
critic appears as a sort of she-Balaam, without that unlucky prophet’s
generous frankness when he found he could not help it; she cannot ban,
and will not bless freely. That on _Philip van Artevelde_ is more
curious still in another way. It makes the most enormous and yet
indecisive sweeps before attacking its subject, feints at the whole
question of Classic _v._ Romantic, says more about Alfieri (who seems to
have been Margaret’s favourite poet) than about Taylor, and finally
despatches the nominal theme in very few and very inadequate words. She
is always attractive[1163]—this “_Margarita_ del Occidente”—this new
“Margarite of America,” and the ideas which, before reading, some may
have formed of her as of a sort of “mother of all such as are
schoolmarms” melt at once in contact with her work. But would she ever
have become a great critic? I doubt it; she certainly had not become one
when she died. She was thinking of things other than the Power of the
Word. Better, if anybody likes; but other.

[Sidenote: _Ripley._]

Her editor, I think, and, with Emerson, certainly her teacher, the
Reverend George Ripley, did very much to imbue his country with foreign
literature; not a little to help it to understand that literature.
Ripley has been very highly spoken of, by good authorities, for the
attempts which he made to produce a higher standard and a wider range of
literary scholarship in the United States: and in fact there is no doubt
that the Transcendental group did yeoman’s service in this way, their
work not a little resembling that done in Germany a hundred years, or a
little less, earlier. But I do not know many of his later Reviews in the
_Tribune_, and his _Specimens of Foreign Literature_, two volumes
published at Boston in 1838 as the ushers and samples of a much larger
library of the subject, are not in the least literary, but purely
philosophical. They give translated extracts from Cousin, Jouffroy, and
Benjamin Constant, with Introductions and rather copious notes or short
excursus. The whole shows knowledge, judgment, and a real critical
capacity; but these good gifts are, as has been said, devoted to the
philosophic, not the literary character and achievement of their
subjects, and it is very noticeable that of the nearly twenty books or
parts of books which are announced as to form the intended library, more
than half are purely philosophical and only a small part purely
literary.

[Sidenote: _Whipple._]

Of Whipple I chiefly know the two volumes of _Essays and Reviews_, which
appeared as long ago as 1849. He must have written much else, as he did
not die till 1886; but the contents of these volumes are bulky enough
and varied enough, I should suppose, to afford a fair field of judgment.
His countrymen have, I believe, rather outgrown him, and do not at
present rank him very high; but the “perspective of the past,” as it
“firms,” will probably establish him in a fair though not a very high
place. He seems to me to have been one of the first American writers who
set themselves to be critics without further ambitions, and took
literature calmly to be their province in the judicial way. He might, no
doubt, have had more style: not that his is bad, but that it is
undistinguished, wanting more grace to win that prize and more vigour to
win the other. He might also have had more grasp. His dicta are
occasionally unfortunate: one reads that Pinkney has written “as well as
Lovelace and Carew, better than Waller, Sedley, _Etherege_, and Dorset”;
and asks for those works of Pinkney which are as good as “To Althea,”
and “To Lucasta,” and “To A. L.”; better than “Phillis is my only Joy”
and “To all you Ladies.”[1164] And it is strange to find a man in two
minds about Keats, and sure that Barry Cornwall has “splendid traits of
genius.” But these things will happen. I do not know what Whipple’s
education was, but I should rather doubt whether he had been
sufficiently brought up on the chief and principal things to keep his
eye from wandering and “wobbling.” His article on the Elizabethan
dramatists has a fatal look of being founded rather on Lamb and Hunt and
Hazlitt than on Dodsley and Dilke. Still he is by no means a merely
negligible quantity in our calculus. He has interesting separate things—
a capital, and, for an American at the moment, very magnanimous article
on Sydney Smith; two notable ones on Talfourd and “British Critics”;
early, and so valuable, notices of _Jane Eyre_ and _Vanity Fair_. A
paper on “South’s Sermons” makes one regret that he did not turn his
attention more to older literature—perhaps he would have had more doubts
about the superiority of Pinkney if he had. Again, he saw, what has
often to this very day been foolishly denied, the _intellectual_
importance of Tennyson—in fact, he seems to have been on the whole more
disposed to the philosophical than to the purely artistic side of
poetry. Of perhaps his two most ambitious essays the “Byron” has the
commonplaceness which Byron’s eulogists and detractors alike so commonly
display; but the “Wordsworth” is much better. He could hardly be called
a critic of genius or even of great talent, but he was fair, not
ill-informed, interested and disinterested (both in the good senses) and
evidently a “corn-and-seeds-man”—that is to say, a critic—“in his
heart.” Which things, if they could be said of all of us, so much the
better.

[Sidenote: _Lanier._]

Mr Sidney Lanier was, I believe, greatly thought of, and was the object
of still greater hopes on the part of those who knew him personally; and
though his career was cut short, there appear in his remains such a love
for literature, and such an ardent desire to keep that love pure and
high, that one cannot but be well affected to him. It is, however,
rather difficult to believe that he would ever have been a really great,
or even a fairly catholic and competent, critic. Occasional utterances
and _aperçus_, when the planets were kind, must at most have been his
portion. In the literature of criticism, which has many strange things,
there is hardly anything odder than his _The English Novel and the
Principle of its Development_,[1165] which is simply a long, rather
discursive, and wholly laudatory review of George Eliot. The selection
of the individual is a matter of little consequence: I wish that I could
save myself constant repetition by printing across the dog’s-ear place
of these pages the warning, “_Never_ judge a critic by your agreement
with his likes and dislikes.” But the narrowing down of so mighty a
theme to the glorification of _any_ single novelist of a passing day
would have been enough to throw the gravest doubts on Mr Lanier’s
competence.

Unluckily there is more. “The quiet and elegant narratives of Miss
Austen,” as the sole notice dealt out to its subject by the author of a
treatise on _the English Novel_, “speaks” that author with a disastrous
finality. A man need not go all lengths for Miss Austen, just as he need
not for Milton or Virgil; but if in a study of Latin or English poetry
as a whole he contented himself with referring _obiter_ to “the elegant
and scholarly verse of Virgil” and the “serious and careful productions
of Milton,” we should know what to think of him. The oddest thing in Mr
Lanier’s book, however, is his intense, his obviously genuine, and I
think his quite nationally disinterested abhorrence[1166] of the “Four
Masters”—of Richardson, Fielding, Smollett, and Sterne. _Pamela_ is “a
silly and hideous realisation” of a really immoral idea. Fielding’s
morality is similar, but “more clownish.” Sterne “spent his life in low,
brutish, inane pursuits.” He “can read none of these books without
feeling as if his soul had been in the rain, draggled, muddy,
miserable.” He would “blot them from the face of the earth.” They are
“muck.” Praise of them is simply “well-meaning ignorance.” Is it
ungenerous in face of this last statement to ask whether it is
well-meaning _knowledge_ which represents “Mr B.” not once but often as
not an orphan but a widower, and Pamela as the servant, not of his
mother but of his wife? I know that Mr Lanier died before he could
revise these lectures for publication. But the point happens to be of
some, if slight, importance, and when we take it in conjunction with the
facts that Mr Lanier thought admirers of _Tom Jones_ must centre their
admiration on Allworthy, and that he accounted for the unpopularity of
_Daniel Deronda_ by asserting that English society felt its satire too
keenly, our old brocard of _judicia ignorantium_ doth something buzz i’
the ear.

But Mr Lanier, though a younger man than Mr Lowell, was, to say nothing
of his inferiority in genius, practically a member of an older school,
corresponding, as I have already remarked, to one which not all
contemporaries of his had outgone in England itself, and which, for the
matter of that, we have not universally outgone even now. Since his day
American criticism (except for that in all probability passing diversion
into “Democratic” parochialism which has been noticed) has become very
much more cosmopolitan, very much more fully developed, and in
particular very much more learned. It has perhaps, of the very latest
years, gone a little too much to Germany for patterns, and plunged too
often into the German _cul-de-sac_ maze of specialist monographs—a
dangerous and soul-killing wilderness, wherein many positively foolish
and hurtful things are done, and where at the best the places are all
too often dry. Yet some of these very monographs have been executed in a
manner escaping the dangers and avoiding the drynesses, and not a few
both of the authors of them and of others have shown soul and sight
considerably above the mere trail-hunting of the specialist. If all
living American critics were to be carried off by a special epidemic, I
should be sorry for two reasons—first of all, because several of them
are my personal friends, and secondly, because I should have to extend
this appendix to an altogether unmanageable length. But meanwhile there
is no doubt that Mr Lowell handed in, once for all, the “proofs” of
American criticism, and that it has nothing now to do but to go on and
prosper.

-----

Footnote 1146:

  Vol. ii., Nos. 1 and 2, July and August 1900 (Burlington, Vt.) The
  author is Mr W. M. Payne.

Footnote 1147:

  In the colonial period not even the untiring industry and the
  microscopic enthusiasm of Professor Tyler have discovered anything
  critical. Mr Charles F. Richardson in _American Literature, 1607-1885_
  (New York and London: Putnams, 1887), i. 396, says plumply, “Criticism
  did not exist in this country during the seventeenth and eighteenth
  centuries, nor did it make much showing until the nineteenth century
  was well advanced.” There is far less of it, for instance, in
  Washington Irving than one might expect. Perhaps some may think that
  an exception ought to be made for Channing. But his Essay on Milton,
  which is the chief critical thing of his known to me, produces that
  sense of bafflement which, if I remember rightly, Renan expresses in
  regard to him on other grounds: “We are aware that it is objected to
  poetry that it gives wrong views of life....” “We gaze on Satan with
  an awe not unmixed with mysterious pleasure....” &c., &c. With such
  matter we have known how to deal in the sixteenth, the seventeenth,
  the eighteenth century; in the nineteenth it loses significance.

Footnote 1148:

  The chief source of my direct knowledge of his work of the kind is the
  collection called _Drift-Wood_, which I have known for very many
  years. Somewhat later—the _Drift-Wood_ papers date from before 1840—he
  inserted critical introductions in his _Poets and Poetry of Europe_
  (1845).

Footnote 1149:

  It fills half the third volume and all the fourth in Mr Ingram’s
  edition of the works (4 vols., Edinburgh, 1874).

Footnote 1150:

  In the article on Lever, where some special gadfly seems to have stung
  Poe.

Footnote 1151:

  _Marg._, 76.

Footnote 1152:

  Ibid., 114.

Footnote 1153:

  Ibid., 177.

Footnote 1154:

  He comes perhaps too close to this in his paper on “The Library of Old
  Authors”; but there was certainly no little provocation in the
  editing, and even in the selection, of some of the volumes of that
  always comely and mainly comfortable series.

Footnote 1155:

  On some minor defects it is not worth while to dwell. Lowell could see
  that Guest had no ear for verse: yet he was all his life long as
  impatient as Guest himself of that duly transferred and adapted
  “classical” system of English prosody which could be easily shown to
  justify almost all the things he himself liked, and to explain the
  badness of those which he thought bad. He began this impatience quite
  early with Poe in the _Fable for Critics_; and he never shook it off.

Footnote 1156:

  London, n. d. The Preface is dated 1888.

Footnote 1157:

  Ed. cit., pp. 184-239.

Footnote 1158:

  Unfortunately the readers of that very peculiar kind of literature the
  “County History” are not often critical students of literature itself:
  so the charm of this remark may be missed.

Footnote 1159:

  This intolerance of things not quite “best and principal” was almost
  as much a _tic_ with him as with Mr Arnold. I was once praising some
  recently printed Old French poems to him. “Are they better than
  Chrestien?” he said. And he would not read them.

Footnote 1160:

  _The Poet at the Breakfast-Table_, chap. v.

Footnote 1161:

  The poets Bryant and Whittier have respectable reputations as critics,
  and, from what I know of their other work, are likely to have deserved
  them. But on the same ground I rather doubt whether it is necessary to
  investigate their criticism for the present purpose. Nor do I think
  that the critical work of Bayard Taylor, of which I have some
  knowledge, imperatively calls for notice. American Shakespeare-critics
  (with Richard Grant White at their head) might occupy a special
  excursus, not without advantage.

Footnote 1162:

  As, for instance, by Professor Brander Matthews, _Introduction to
  American Literature_ (New York, 1896), p. 226.

Footnote 1163:

  And she can sometimes be piquant. This of the Schlegels: “Men to find
  plausible meaning for the deepest enigma, or to hang up each map of
  literature, well painted and dotted, on its proper roller,” is quite
  inspiriting and tempts one to regret that she was thrown away on
  Transcendentalism and Italomania.

Footnote 1164:

  One might add the question, “What has ‘Gentle George’ Etherege to do
  in this galley?” though he pulls a good oar in another.

Footnote 1165:

  New York, 1883. The characteristics here noted appear also in the
  recently and handsomely produced book on the Elizabethan period,
  _Shakespeare and his Forerunners_, 2 vols., 1903. The much earlier
  _Science of English Verse_, 1880, attempts to explain prosody by
  musical signs, and is thus out of the pale.

Footnote 1166:

  The expressions quoted and others will be found at pp. 169-183, _op.
  cit._ Lanier, though quite unprejudiced, I think, by nationality, was
  badly bitten by the equally fatal though less ignoble mania of
  “Progress,” and by the moral heresy. He shows the same marks as do so
  many pre-Arnoldian English critics of the mid-nineteenth century.




                                 INDEX.


 Adolphus, John Leycester (1795-1862), 272 _note_.
 Addison, 7, 8, 38, 54, 58, 72 _sq._, 146, 176, 189, 194, 227 _note_,
    231, 398.
 _Adventurer, The_, 67 _sq._
 _Advice to an Author_, 158.
 _Ægri Somnia_, 337 _sq._
 Æschylus, 46, 47, 103, 225, 226, 400.
 _Æsthetica_, Baumgarten’s, 148 _sq._
 Æsthetics, v. Bk. vii. ch. v., ibid., ch. vii. _passim_.
 Ainger, Canon, 257 _sq._
 Akenside, 57.
 _Aletheophilus_, 149.
 _Alice Fell_, 216 _note_.
 Alison, Archibald (1757-1839), 164-167, 291 _note_.
 _Allgemeine Theorie der Schönen Künste_, 150.
 Amiel, Henri Frédéric (1821-1881), 388, 594-598.
 _Among my Books_, 637.
 Ampère, J. J. (1800-1864), 300.
 _Ancient Mariner, The_, 219.
 André, Yves Marc de l’Isle-, Père (1675-1764), 146, 151, 186 _note_.
 Andrieux, François G. J. S. (1759-1833), 130 _note_.
 _Anima Poetæ_, 218 _sq._, 227 _sq._
 _Anti-Jacobin, The_, 286 _sq._
 Antoniewicz, Herr J. von, 15 _note_, 30, 147.
 _Appreciations_, 548 _sq._
 Ariosto, 36, 69, 77, 161, 179, 400.
 Aristophanes, 46, 47, 252.
 Aristotle, _passim_.
 Arnold, Matthew (1822-1888), 33, 37, 46 _note_, 55, 57, 96, 118, 120,
    126, 150 _note_, 218, 222, 230, 245, 286, 295, 302 _note_, 312, 320,
    326 _note_, 369, 420, 482, 505 _note_, 515-537, 589, 623.
 _Art d’Écrire_, Condillac’s, 99 _note_.
 Ashe, Thomas (1836-1889), 220 _note_.
 Asselineau, Charles (1820-1874), 453.
 _Atala_, 316.
 Auger, Louis S. (1772-1829), 132, 133 _note_, 136.
 Austen, Miss, 108.

 Babou, Hippolyte (1824-1878), 453.
 Bacon, 153, 176, 232.
 Bagehot, Walter (1826-1877), 542, 543.
 Balzac (the elder), 311, 312.
 —-- (the younger), 303, 457.
 Banville, Théodore de (1823-1891), 450.
 Barbazan, 177.
 Barbey d’Aurévilly, Jules (1808-1889), 433-436.
 Basil, St, 538 _note_.
 Batteux, 29, 43, 131.
 Baudelaire, Charles (1821-1867), 452.
 Baumgarten, Alex. G. (1714-1762), 148-150, 392.
 _Baviad_ and _Mæviad, The_, 286 _sq._
 Béat de Muralt. See Muralt.
 Beattie, 57.
 Beaumont, Sir George, 205.
 Beddoes, 620, 621.
 Beers, Mr H. A., 69 _note_.
 _Beiträge_, Gottsched’s, 20.
 Benlowes, Edward (1603-1676), 6, 7.
 Bentley, 183 _note_.
 _Bertram_, Coleridge’s critique on, 213 _note_, 219 _note_.
 Beyle, Henri (1783-1842), 135-139, 160.
 _Bijoux Indiscrets, Les_, 94.
 _Biographia Literaria_, 201 _sq._
 _Blackwood’s Magazine_, 502-504.
   See also De Quincey, Lockhart, Maginn, Wilson.
 Blair, 104, 128, 131, 157 _note_, 163 _note_, 166.
 Blake, William (1757-1827), 232, 236, 244, 266-269.
 Blankenberg, 150.
 _Blossoms of Helicon, The_, 7 _note_.
 Boas, Herr, 380 _note_.
 Boccaccio, 124.
 Bodmer, Johann Jakob (1698-1785), 20-28, 193, 392.
 Boileau, 14, 21, 124, 129, 177, 377.
 _Bon Gaultier Ballads, The_, 289.
 Borinski, Dr K., 16 _note_, _sq._
 Borrow, George, 283 _note_.
 Bosanquet, Mr, 168, 169 _note_, 183 _note_, 573 _note_.
 Bouhours, 12, 131.
 Bowles, William Lisle (1762-1850), 218, 229, 279-281.
 Boyer [Bowyer], 218.
 —-- Philoxène (1827-1867), 453.
 Bradley, Prof., 616, 629.
 Braitmaier, Herr F., 15 _note_, and Bk. vii. ch. ii. _passim_, 148.
 Brandes, Dr, 386 _note_.
 Breitinger, Johann Jakob (1701-1776), 20-28, 148.
 Bridges, Mr Robert, 207 _note_.
 Brimley, George (1819-1857), 504-508.
 _British Muse, The_, 175 _note_.
 Browne, Sir T., 297.
 Browning, Mrs, 514 _note_.
 Brumoy, 39, 43 _note_.
 Brunetière, M., 184, 309, 455, 469.
 Bryant, 641 _note_.
 Brydges, Sir Samuel Egerton (1762-1837), 283, 284.
 Buchanan, Mr Robert, 561 _note_.
 Buchner, August (1591-1661), 17.
 Bunyan, 161, 163.
 Bürger, Gottfried August (1747-1794), 378, 379, 384, 576.
 Burke, Edmund (1729-1797), 162-164, 229, 400.
 Butler, Samuel (1612-1680), 5-7.
 Byron, George Gordon, Lord (1788-1824), 110, 136, 228, 234, 280-282,
    371 _sq._, 376.

 Caine, Mr Hall, 426 _note_.
 Callières, 12, 176.
 Campbell, Mr Dykes, 219 _note_, 221 _note_.
 —-- Thomas (1777-1844), 112 _note_, 232, 272-274.
 Canning, 288 _sq._
 Capell, Edward (1713-1781), 175 _note_.
 Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881), 38, 48, 385, 387 _sq._, 393, 416 _sq._,
    405-409, 537 _sq._
 Caro, Esme Marie (1826-1887), 465, 466.
 Carrière, Moritz (b. 1817), 573-575.
 Castelvetro, viii, 195.
 Catullus, 124, 277.
 _Causeries_, Sainte-Beuve’s, 317 _sq._
 _Censura Literaria_, 282, 283 _note_.
 Cervantes, 159, 182.
 Channing, William E. (1780-1842), 631 _note_.
 _Character of a Small Poet_, 6, 7.
 _Characteristics_, 158, 159.
 _Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays_, 258, 259.
 Chasles, V. E. Philarète (1798-1873), 432, 433.
 Chateaubriand, François Aug., Vicomte de (1768-1848), 99, 109-117, 131,
    194, 313-317.
 _Chateaubriand et son Groupe Littéraire_, 313-317.
 Chaucer, 71, 77, 174, 256, 258, 273, 409.
 Chenier, A., 117.
 —-- M. J. (1764-1811), 130, 131.
 Chesterfield, 504 _note_.
 Christopher North. See Wilson, John.
 Church, Richard William (1815-1890), 558.
 Cicero, 124.
 Claudian, 282.
 Claughton, Thomas Legh, Bishop of Rochester (1808-1892), 626.
 Coleridge, Mr Ernest, 218, 227.
 —-- Hartley (1796-1849), 283 _note_, 485-487.
 —-- Samuel Taylor (1772-1834), 37, 126, 142, 149, 155, 168, 194, 197
    half-title, 200-233, 236, 239, 243, 249, 250, 256, 258, 278, 288,
    291 _note_, 310, 375, 392, 393, 396 _note_, 411 _sq._, 418 _note_,
    472, 478, 484, 487 _note_, 489, 536, 541, 548.
 Collier, J. P., 209 _note_.
 Collier, Jeremy, 257.
 Collins, 58.
 —-- Mr Churton, 427 _note_.
 _Comic Writers, The English_, 256, 257.
 “Comparative Literature,” 460 _note_, 462 _sq._
 Condillac, 99 _note_.
 Congreve, 161, 239.
 Conti, Antonio (1677-1749), 23 and _note_, 51 _note_.
 Conybeare, John Josias (1779-1824), 620.
 Copleston, Edward, Bishop of Llandaff (1776-1849), 618-620.
 Corneille, 13, 37, 161, 397.
 Courthope, Mr, 616, 629.
 Cousin, Victor (1792-1867), 133.
 Cowper, 204, 228.
 Creed, The Romantic, 409, 410.
 Creighton, Bishop, 603.
 Crépet’s _Poètes Français_, 450 _sq._
 Crisp, “Daddy,” 39 _note_, 43 _note_.
 “Criticism of Life,” 531 _sq._
 Croce, Signor Benedetto, 152 _note_, 155, 169 _note_, 589 _note_.
 Croker, John Wilson (1780-1857), 494, 509.
 _Cromwell_, Preface to, 331 _sq._

 Dallas, Eneas Sweetland (1828-1879), 511-513.
 Dante, vi, 114, 179, 180, 210 _note_, 214-216, 228, 247, 248, 256, 534
    _sq._
 Danzel, 19 _note_, 20.
 _Defence of Poetry_, Shelley’s, 274, 275.
 _De la Littérature_, Madame de Staël’s, 101 _sq._
 _De la Littérature Allemande_, 48-51.
 _De l’Allemagne_, 101 _sq._
 _De Constantia Jurisprudentis_, 153.
 _De Logomachiis Eruditorum_, 18.
 _De Meteoris Orationis_, 19.
 _De Nonnullis ad Poema Pertinentibus_, 148, 149.
 _De Studiorum Ratione_, 152.
 _De Vulgari Eloquio_, 201, 210, 215, 216.
 Defoe, 242.
 Delille, 122 _sq._, 333.
 Delius, 575.
 Denham, 6.
 Denina, ix.
 Dennis, ix, 286, 408.
 De Quincey, Thomas (1785-1859), 81, 355 _note_, 405 _note_, 412,
    478-482.
 De Sanctis, Francesco (1817-1883), 589-591.
 Descartes, 146.
 Dickens, 364 _note_.
 Diderot, Denis (1713-1784), 41, 89-97, 99, 109, 111, 117, 178, 185, 190
    _note_, 192, 194, 217.
 _Die Vernünftigen Tadlerinnen_, 19.
 _Dies Boreales_, 473 _sq._
 _Diskurse der Maler_, 19 _sq._
 Disraeli, Isaac (1766-1848), 284.
 _Divina Commedia, The_, 108.
 Dobell, Sydney, 514 _note_.
 _Doctor, The_, 235 _sq._
 _Don Quixote_, 182.
 Doudan, Ximenès (1800-1872), 436-438.
 Doyle, Sir Francis Hastings Charles (1810-1888), 626, 627.
 Dryden, 6, 9, 14, 44 _note_, 54, 55, 71, 159, 179, 192, 200, 222, 229,
    249, 256, 310, 330, 364, 398, 418 _note_, 443, 504, 513 _note_, 520.
 Du Bellay, 200.
 Ducange, 177.
 Dussault, Jean F. J. (1769-1824), 129.
 Dyer, 58.

 Eberhard, Joh. Aug. (1739-1809), 151.
 Eckermann, Joh. Peter (1792-1854), 301, 366 _sq._
 _Edinburgh Review, The_, 213 _note_, 286, 290.
 Egger, M., 319.
 _Elia_, 237 _sq._
 Elton, Professor, vi.
 Elwin, Whitwell (1816-1900), 510.
 Elze, 575.
 Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1803-1882), 633, 634.
 _Emile_, 98.
 _English Metrists_, 83 _note_.
 _English Rhythms_, 235 _note_.
 _Epistolæ Obscurorum Virorum_, 296.
 “Esemplastic,”  }
 “Esenoplastic,” } 228.
 _Essai sur le Beau_, 151.
 _Essai sur les Fictions_, 102.
 _Essai sur les Règnes de Claude et de Néron_, 94.
 _Essay on Genius_, 164 _note_.
 _Essay on Pope_, 66.
 _Essay on Taste_, Alison’s, 164-167.
 —-- Gerard’s, 164 _note_.
 —-- Jeffrey’s, 164, 291 _note_.
 _Essays in Criticism_, 521 _sq._
 _Essays on Men and Manners_, 63.
 _Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary_, 160.
 Etienne, 130.
 Euripides, 200.
 _Excursion, The_, 213.

 Faguet, M. Émile, 339, 469.
 Farmer, Dr, 488.
 Feletz, C. M. Dorimont, Abbé de (1767-1850), 132.
 Felltham, Owen, 297 _note_.
 Fénelon, 177.
 Feydeau, 324 _note_.
 Fichte, 417.
 Fiévée, 130.
 Finlay, Mr F. G., 62 _note_.
 Fiorentino, 348 _note_.
 _Firmilian_, x.
 Flaubert, Gustave (1821-1880), 116, 120, 189, 228, 454, 461, 545, 581.
 Flemming, 369.
 Flint, Professor, 152 _note_, 153 _note_, 156.
 Fontanes, Louis, Marquis de (1757-1821), 112 _not_, 113, 127.
 Fontenelle, 9, 56, 177, 195, 230.
 _Fool of Quality, The_, 539.
 Forman, Mr Buxton, 473 _note_.
 Foscolo, Ugo (1778-1827), 407 _note_.
 Foster, John (1731-1774), 83.
 —-- (1770-1843), 513.
 Fournier, Edouard (1819-1880), 453.
 Fox, W. J. (1786-1864), 513.
 France, M. Anatole, 455 _note_, 469.
 Franciosi, Signor, viii.
 Frederick the Great (1712-1786), 48-51.
 Freytag, Gustav (_b._ 1816), 578, 579.
 _Friend, The_, 219.
 Froude, James Anthony (1818-1894), 539.
 Fuller, Margaret (1810-1850), 164, 642.

 Garat, Dominique Joseph (1749-1833), 130.
 Garbett, James (1802-1879), 625, 626.
 _Gaspard de la Nuit_, 305.
 Gautier, Théophile (1811-1872), 36, 120, 324 _note_, 338-342, 450, 475
    _note_.
 _Gay Science, The_, 512 _sq._
 _Gaya Scienza, La_, 583.
 Gellert, 28 and _note_, 50.
 _Génie du Christianisme_, 111 _sq._
 Geoffroy, Jules-Louis (1743-1814), 128, 129.
 Gerard, Alexander (1728-1795), 165 _note_, 291 _note_.
 Gervinus, G. G. (1805-1871), 575-577.
 Gibbon, 323.
 Gifford, William (1756-1826), 232, 242, 253, 286 _sq._, 289 _note_.
 Gilpin, 83.
 Ginguené, Pierre Louis (1748-1816), 130.
 Girardin, Saint-Marc (1801-1873), 320, 343, 344.
 _Globe_, The, 300 _sq._, 367, 368.
 Godwin, 243, 253, 263, 270 _note_.
 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-1832), 50, 97, 106, 117, 168, 193,
    223 _note_, 251, 300, 301, 366-377, 388.
 _Goetz von Berlichingen_, 50.
 Goncourt, Émile (1822-1867); and Jules (1830-1870), de, 124, 307
    _note_, 452 _note_, 458, 459.
 Gosse, Mr. Edmund, 56 _note_, 128, 546 _note_.
 —-- M. Etienne, 128.
 Gottsched, 12, 19, 20, 24 and _note_, 193, 392.
 _Götzen-Dammerung_, 585.
 “Grand Style,” The, 522 _sq._
 Gravina, 9, 56.
 Gray, Thomas (1716-1771), 53, 63, 81, 186, 194, 203, 212, 217, 418
    _note_.
 Grillparzer, Franz (1791-1872), Bk. ix. half-title, 569-573, 582
    _note_.
 _Grotesques, Les_, 341.
 Gryphius, Andreas (1616-1664), 18, 30, 31.
 Gudeman, Professor, vii.
 Guest, Edwin (1800-1880), 235 _note_, 637 _note_.
 Guizot, François P. G. (1787-1874), 133 _note_.
 —-- Mme., see Meulan.
 Gurney, Edmund (1847-1888), 559-661.
 Guttinguer, Ulric (1785-1886), 308 _note_.

 Haldane, Mr, 582.
 Hallam, Arthur Henry (1811-1837), 513 _note_.
 —-- Henry (1777-1859), viii, 293-298, 474.
 Haller, 28 and _note_.
 Hamann, Johann Georg (1730-1788), 352, 353, 359.
 _Hamburgische Dramaturgie_, 34 _sq._, 94 _note_.
 Hamelius, Herr, 13.
 Hannay, Mr D., 48.
 —-- James (1827-1873), 511.
 Hardenberg, F. von, see Novalis.
 Hawkins, William (1722-1801), 616 _note_.
 Haym, R., 386 _note_.
 Hayward, Abraham (1801-1894), 509.
 —-- Thomas (_d._ 1779?), 175 _note_.
 Hazlitt, William (1778-1830), 224, 229, 232, 234, 238, 239, 244, 247,
    248, 251-266, 273, 280, 314 _note_, 412 _sq._
 Hegel, G. W. F. (1776-1831), 188.
 Heine, Heinrich (1799-1856), 27 _note_, 50, 386, 563-566, 571, 573
    _note_.
 Heinsius, 40.
 _Héloise, La Nouvelle_, 98, 102.
 Helps, Sir Arthur (1813-1875), 509, 510.
 Henley, Mr W. E., 561 _note_.
 Hennequin, Émile (1859-1888), 222, 459-462.
 _Henriade_, The, 114.
 Herder, Johann G. (1744-1803), 49, 149, 353, 355-359, 380, 392.
 Héricault, Charles d’ (1823-?), 453.
 Heywood, 239.
 Hillebrand, Karl (1829-1884), 579-581, 582 _note_.
 _Histoire de la Littérature Anglaise_, 440 _sq._
 _Histoire du Romantisme_, 341 _sq._
 _Histoire Littéraire de La France_, 177.
 _History of English Poetry_ (Warton’s), 70 _sq._
 Hoeck, Theobald, 16, 17.
 Hoffman, François B. (1760-1828), 129, 130.
 Hoffmann, 565.
 Holmes, Oliver Wendell (1809-1884), 639, 640.
 —-- Robert (1748-1805), 616 _note_.
 Homer, 114, 154 _sq._, 162, 521 _sq._
 _Hommes et Dieux_, 451.
 Horace, 39, 49, 73 _sq._
 Horne, Richard Hengist (1803-1884), 263 _note_, 514 _note_.
 Houghton, Lord (Milnes, Richard Monckton) (1809-1885), 557.
 _Hudibras_, 104.
 Hueffer, Mr, 560.
 Hughes (editor of Spenser), 173.
 Hugo, Victor F. M. (1802-1885), 120, 127, 131, 185, 197 half-title,
    307, 330-335, 336, 337, 345, 346, 369, 371, 434, 438, 461, 591, 593.
 Hume, David (1711-1776), 159-162.
 Hunt, James Henry Leigh (1784-1869), 232, 234, 239, 246-251, 257, 412
    _sq._
 Hurd, Richard (1720-1808), Bishop of Worcester, 1, 7, 40, 41, 53,
    72-80, 93, 179, 185, 189 _note_, 190 _note_, 192, 273.
 Hurdis, James (1763-1801), 617, 618.
 Hutton, Richard Holt (1826-1897), 543, 544.

 _Ideen_ (Herder’s), 357, 358.
 _Imagination and Fancy_, 248.
 _Inner Life of Art, The_, 542.
 _Inquiry into the Principles of Harmony in Language_, 85, 86.
 Irving, Sir H., 96 _note_.
 —-- Washington, 631 _note_.

 _Jacques le Fataliste_, 91.
 Janin, Jules (1804-1874), 453.
 Jean Paul, see Richter.
 Jeffrey, Francis (1773-1850), 112 _note_, 128 _note_, 232, 274 _note_,
    289-293, 408.
 Johnson, 75, 85, 194, 195, 217, 222, 279, 310, 398, 408, 424, 435, 605.
 Joubert, Joseph (1754-1824), 1, 99, 117-126, 128, 194, 264 _note_, 333,
    370, 390.
 Jouffroy, 300.

 Keats, John (1795-1821), 55, 275 _note_.
 Keble, John (1792-1866), 621-625.
 Ker, Professor, vi.
 Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875), 538, 539.
 Kirke-White, 234.
 Klopstock, 28, 359 _note_.
 Klotz, 45, 47, 357.
 _Knight’s Quarterly_, 490 _sq._
 Koberstein, 15 _note_.
 König, N. (1688-1744), 22, 23, 51 _note_.
 Kont, M., 39 _note sq._
 Krantz, M., 146 _note_.
 _Kritische Dichtkunst_, _K. Betrachtung_, &c., see Bodmer.

 La Bruyère, 8.
 Lacretelle, 130.
 La Fontaine, 124.
 La Harpe, 4, 12, 289, 296.
 Lamartine, 137 _note_, 346.
 Lamb, Charles (1775-1834), 232, 234, 236-246, 257, 412 _sq._
 Lancaster, Henry Hill (1829-1875), 511.
 Landor, Walter Savage (1775-1864), 276-279.
 Langhorne, 533.
 Lanier, Sidney (1842-1881), 643, 644.
 _Laocoön, The_, 36 _sq._
 Latouche, H. de, 348 _note_.
 _Latter-Day Pamphlets_, 498.
 _Leader, The_, 542 _note_.
 Le Bossu, 131.
 Leibnitz, 228.
 _Lectures_, Coleridge’s, 220 _sq._
 _Lectures on the Age of Elizabeth_, 257, 258.
 _Lectures on the English Poets_, 252 _sq._
 Legouvé, 130.
 Lemaître, M. Jules, 470.
 Lemcke, Professor, 419.
 Lemercier, L. Népomucène (1771-1840), 131, 132.
 Lemoyne, the Père, 116.
 _Les Deux Masques_, 451.
 _Les Templiers_, 106.
 Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim (1729-1781), 33-48, 94 _note_, 97, 117, 163
    _note_, 176, 178, 181, 185, 187, 193, 214, 222, 249, 388, 392, 545.
 _Letter to a Friend of Robert Burns_, 201 _note_.
 _Letter to John Murray_, 280.
 Letters of Schiller and Goethe, 381 _sq._
 _Letters on Chivalry and Romance_, 75 _sq._
 _Lettres d’Amabed, Les_, 94.
 _Lettres sur les Anglois et sur les François_, 13, 14.
 _Lettres sur Rousseau_, 101, 102.
 Lewes, George Henry (1812-1878), 540-542.
 Lichtenberg, Georg Christoph (1742-1799), 354.
 _Littérature et Philosophie Mêlées_, 331 _sq._
 Locke, 146, 176.
 Lockhart, John Gibson (1794-1854), 412, 482-485.
 _London_, 561 _note_.
 _London Magazine, The_, 554 _note_.
 Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth (1807-1882), 632, 633.
 Longinus _passim_.
 Lope de Vega, 39 _note_.
 Lowell, James Russell (1819-1891), 286, 630, 636-639.
 Lowth, Robert, Bishop of London (1710-1787), 617.
 Lucian, 252.
 Lucretius, 159, 161, 200.
 Lydgate, Gray on, 61, 62.
 _Lyrical Ballads_, Preface to, 201 _sq._

 Macaulay, Thomas B. (1800-1859), 14 _note_, 39 _note_, 257, 272, 297,
    489-495.
 Mackenzie, Henry, 345.
 Maginn, William (1793-1842), 166, 437-449.
 Magnin, C. (1793-1862), 347, 348.
 _Maid of the Mill_, The, 224.
 Maistre, Joseph de, 139, 305.
 Malebranche, 146.
 Mambrun, 46.
 Mansel, Henry Longueville (1820-1871), 557.
 _Marginalia_, Coleridge’s, 220 _sq._
 _Marius the Epicurean_, 544 _sq._
 Marivaux, 178.
 Marmontel, 34, 35, 131, 177.
 Martial, 39 and _note_, 381.
 Mason, John (1706-1763), 79-82.
 —-- William, 57 _sq._
 Masson, Professor, 478 _note_, 480.
 Matthews, Professor Brander, 641 _note_.
 Maupassant, Guy de, 454 _note_.
 Mazzini, 589 _note_.
 _Mélanges Littéraires_ (Chateaubriand’s), 112 _note_.
 _Mélanges tirés d’une Petite Bibliothèque_, 140.
 _Mémoires d’un Touriste_, 139.
 Mendelssohn, Moses (1729-1786), 32, 33.
 Menéndez y Pelayo, Señor, 588.
 Mérimée, Prosper (1803-1870), 135, 137, 348-350, 435.
 Meulan, Pauline de, 133 _note_.
 Michelet, Jules (1798-1874), 329, 330.
 Mill, John Stuart (1806-1873), 106, 514.
 Milman, Henry Hart (1791-1868), 509, 620, 621.
 Milnes, see Houghton.
 Milton, 8, 22 _sq._, 61, 114, 122, 176, 212, 229, 279, 400, 523 _sq._
 Minto, William (1845-1893), 553, 554.
 _Miscellanies, Æsthetic and Literary_, 225.
 Mitford, William (1744-1827), 83-86, 491.
 “Modern,” the term, 3, 4.
 Moland, Louis (_b._ 1824), 453.
 Molière, 124, 136, 397.
 _Monachopornomachia_, 45.
 _Monsieur Nicolas_, 382.
 Montagu, Mrs (Elizabeth Robinson) (1720-1810), 173 _note_.
 Montaiglon, M. de (_b._ 1824), 310 _note_, 453.
 Montaigne, 177.
 Montégut, Émile (_b._ 1825), Bk. ix. half-title, 443 _note_, 444-447.
 Montgomery, Robert, 493.
 Morandi, Signor Luigi, 588.
 Morley, Mr John, 591.
 _Morte Amoureuse, La_, 36.
 Munro, H. A. J. (1819-1885), 183 _note_.
 Muralt, Louis Béat de (1665-1741), 13-15.
 Myers, Frederic William Henry (1843-1901), 552 _note_.
 Mylius, Christlob (1722-1754), 28 and _note_.
 _My Study Windows_, 637, 638.

 Nerval, Gérard de (= Gérard Labrunie), 450 _note_.
 Nettleship, Henry (1839-1893), 183 _note_.
 _Neveu de Rameau, Le_, 91.
 Nicholls, 180.
 Nicolai, 32.
 Nicolas, Sir N. Harris (1799-1848), 283, 284.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich (1844-1900), 581-586.
 Nisard, Désiré (1806-1888), 335-338.
 _Noctes Ambrosianæ_, 472 _sq._
 Nodier, Charles (1780-1844), 139, 140.
 North, Christopher, see Wilson, John.
 _Nouveaux Lundis_, 324 _sq._
 “Novalis,” _i.e._, Friedrich von Hardenberg (1772-1801), 386-390, 565.

 _Observations on Poetry_, 83 _note_.
 _Observations on Spenser_, 68 _sq._
 Oeckhe Othoblad, see Hoeck, Theobald.
 Oldys, William (1696-1761), 54, 174, 175 and _note_.
 _Omniana_, 225.
 Omond, Mr T. S., 83 _note_.
 _On Translating Homer_, 521 _sq._
 Opitz, 192, 298 _note_, 357 _note_, 400.
 _Orientales_, Preface to the, 85, 331 _sq._
 _Ossian_, 59, 104, 112 _note_, 116, 135, 176, 359.
 Ozanam, 348 _note_.

 Paculford, Professor, 538 _note._
 Palgrave, Francis Turner (1824-1897), 628, 629.
 _Paradoxe sur le Comédien_, 91 _sq._
 _Parerga und Paralipomena_, 566 _sq._
 Paris, Gaston (1839-1903), 464, 465.
 Pascal, 124.
 Pater, Walter Horatio (1839-1894), 120, 183 _note_, 326 _note_, 451,
    544-551.
 Patmore, Coventry K. D. (1823-1890), 558, 559.
 Patrizzi, 222, 334, 533.
 Pattison, Mark (1813-1884), 557.
 _Paul et Virginie_, 115.
 Paul, Mr Kegan, 538.
 Payne, Mr W. M., 631 _note_.
 Peacock, Thomas Love (1785-1866), 162 _note_, 274, 537.
 Pemberton, Henry (1694-1771), 83 _note_.
 Percy, Thomas (1729-1811), Bishop of Dromore, 53, 64-66, 192.
 Petrarch, 179.
 Petronius, 209 _note_.
 _Pharonnida_, 273, 290, 408.
 Philips, Ambrose (1675?-1749), 54 _note_.
 Phillips, Edward, 244.
 Philostratus, 275 _note_.
 Pindar, Peter. See Wolcot.
 _Plain Speaker, The_, 259, 260.
 Planche, J.B. Gustave (1808-1857), 344-347.
 Plato, 142, 156, 274.
 Plutarch, 97.
 Poe, Edgar Allan (1809-1849), 634-636.
 “Poetic Moment, The,” 143 _sq._, 532 _sq._
 Poitou, M., 118 _note_.
 Politian, viii, 183 _note_, 277, 296.
 Pollock, Mr W. H., 96 _note_.
 Pontmartin, Armand, Comte de (1811-1890), 467, 468.
 Pope, 66, 67, 104, 161, 176, 194, 200, 273, 279-282, 368, 424.
 _Port Royal_, 310-313.
 _Portraits Contemporains_, 306 _sq._
 _Portraits Littéraires, Portraits de Femmes_, Sainte-Beuve’s, 303 _sq._
 _Power of Numbers, The, in Prose and Poetry_, 80-82.
 _Prœlectiones Academicæ._ See Copleston, Keble, &c.
 _Preface_ to _Lyrical Ballads_, &c., 200 _sq._
 —-- to Mr Arnold’s _Poems_, 517 _sq._
 _Premiers Lundis_, 200 _sq._
 Prior, 8, 173.
 _Principles of Success in Literature, The_, 540 _sq._
 Pringle-Pattison, Professor, 514 _note_.
 _Promenades dans Rome_, 139.
 Prudhomme, M. Sully, 465.
 _Pursuits of Literature, The_, 287 _sq._
 Posnett, Mr H. M., 460 _note_.
 _Power of Sound, The_, 559.
 Pye, 83.

 _Quarterly Review, The_, 213 _note_.
 Quinet, Edgar (1803-1875), 329, 330.
 Quintilian, 124, 222, 228 _note_.
 Quintus Smyrnæus, 302 _note_.

 Rabelais, 177-225.
 Racine, 115, 123, 136, 161, 311-313.
 _Racine et Shakespeare_, 155-157.
 Radcliffe, Mrs, 253.
 Raleigh, Professor, vi, 202 _note_, 212 _note_, 216 _note_.
 Ramsay, Allan, 54.
 Randolph, John (1749-1813), Bishop of London, 616 _note_.
 Raynouard, 106.
 _Recreations of Christopher North_, 472 _sq._
 _Reisebilder_, The, 563 _sq._
 _Rejected Addresses_, 289.
 _Reliques_, Percy’s, 65 _sq._
 Rémusat, Charles de, 300.
 Renan, Ernest (1723-1892), 348, 439, 446.
 Repplier, Miss Agnes, 219 _note,_.
 _Retrospective Review, The_, x, 283, 286.
 Reynolds, Sir J., 523.
 _Rhadamanthus_, 234 _note_.
 _Rhetoric_, De Quincey on, 481 _sq._
 Rhys, Mr E., 201 _note_, 279 _note_, 280 _note_.
 Richardson, 92, 93, 102, 256, 257.
 —--, Mr C. F., 631 _note_.
 Richter, Jean Paul F. (1763-1825), 106, 384-386.
 Ripley, George (1802-1880), 642.
 Ritson, 65.
 Rivarol, 287.
 Rogers, Henry (1806-1877), 514.
 _Rolliad_, The, 288 _note_.
 _Roman Experimental, Le_, 455 _sq._
 _Romania_, 464 _sq._
 _Romeo and Juliet_, 108.
 Rönnfeldt, Mr, 360 _note_.
 Ronsard, 177, 192, 298 _note_.
 Roscoe, W. C., 514 _note_.
 Rousseau, 97-99, 108, 110, 178.
 Rümelin, Gustav (1815-1889), 577, 578.
 Ruskin, John (1819-1900), 115 _note_, 120, 228, 539, 540.
 Rymer, 34, 35, 247, 297.

 _Saint Louis_, 116 _note_.
 Saint-Victor, Paul, Comte de (1827-1881), 120, 440, 441, 450, 451.
 Sainte-Beuve, Charles Augustin (1804-1869), 46 _note_, 119, 126, 127,
    133 _note_, 135, 138, 189, 197 _half-title_, 222, 230, 300-329, 343
    _note_, 414 _sq._, 420, 431, 443, 450, 513 _note_, 585, 589, 592.
 Sainte-Palaye, 172, 177.
 _Salons_, Diderot’s, 96.
 Sand, George, 260 _note_, 435.
 Sandys, Dr, vii, 183 _note_.
 _Satyrane’s Letters_, 218 _note_, 219 _note_.
 Saunders, Mr Bailey, 566 _note_.
 Scaliger, 69, 222, 377.
 Schack, 181.
 Schelling, Professor, 419.
 Scherer, Edmond (1815-1889), 96, 443, 447-450, 594.
 Schiller, Joh. Chr. Friedrich (1759-1805), 105 _note_, 106, 193, 225,
    229, 367, 368, 377-384.
 Schlegel, August Wilhelm (1767-1845), 29, 378, 381, 391-402, 438.
 —--, Johann Adolf (1721-1793), 29, 30, 43 _note_.
 —--, Johann Elias (1718-1749), 30-32, 147, 193, 359.
 Schlegel, Johann Heinrich, 20 _note_.
 —--, Karl Wilhelm Friedrich (1772-1829), 29, 391-402, 571.
 Schlegels, The, 29 _sq._, 101 _sq._, 117, 133, 181, 221 _note_, 222,
    273, 371, 391-402.
 Schlosser, 405.
 Schopenhauer, Arthur (1788-1860), 566-568.
 Schreyvogel, Joseph, 573 _note_.
 Schubarth, Karl Ernst (1796-1861), 403, 404.
 _Scienza Nuova_, 152-157.
 _Schönes Blumenfeldt_, 16.
 Schottel, Justus G. (1612-1676), 17.
 Scott, Sir Walter (1771-1832), 136, 179, 232, 247, 253, 260, 263,
    270-272, 290, 371 _sq._, 457, 533 _note_.
 Sellar, William G. (1825-1890), 183 _note_.
 Seneca, Diderot on, 94, 95.
 Senior, N. W. (1790-1864), 509.
 Sévigné, Mme. de, 52 _note_.
 Shadwell, 14.
 Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of (1671-1713), 157-159.
 Shairp, John Campbell (1819-1885), 627, 628.
 Shakespeare, 22, 30, 37, 41, 42, 50, 52 _note_, 104, 122, 127, 132,
    170, 172, 173, 176, 187, 188, 220 _sq._, 225, 241 _sq._, 258, 259,
    260, 297, 353, 359, 361, 376, 388, 519 _sq._, 533, 550.
 Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822), 232, 244, 260, 274, 275, 376, 387,
    507.
 Shenstone, William (1714-1763), 53, 63, 64, 174, 202.
 Sidney, 229, 253, 257.
 Sismondi, 592 _note_.
 “Skroddles,” 59.
 Smith, Adam (1723-1790), 12, 157 _note_.
 —-- Mr D. Nichol, 68 _note_, 173 _note_.
 —-- Mr Gregory, 83 _note_.
 —-- Sydney, 509.
 —-- William H. (1808-1872), 502 _note_.
 Solger, Karl W. F. (1780-1819), 404.
 _Soliman the Second_, 34, 35, 188.
 _Sophocles_, 161, 162.
 Sorel, Ch., ix.
 Soret, 370 _note_.
 Southern, Henry (1799-1853), 283.
 Southey, Robert (1774-1843), 218 _note_, 225, 229, 232-237, 243, 244,
    272, 617 _note_.
 _Specimens_, Campbell’s, 272.
 —-- Lamb’s, 240.
 _Specimens of British Critics_, 473 _sq._
 _Spectator, The_, 20.
 Spence, 616.
 Spenser, 64, 68 _sq._, 71, 76 _sq._, 104, 173, 174, 225, 249, 256, 273,
    409, 473 _sq._
 _Spirit of the Age, The_, 262, 263.
 _Sprüche in Prosa_, 361 _sq._
 Staël, A. L. Germaine Necker, Mme. de (1766-1817), 99-109, 116, 127,
    194, 291 _sq._, 392 _sq._
 Stapfer, M. Paul, 294 _note_.
 Stephen, Sir James (1789-1859), 514.
 —-- Sir J. Fitzjames (1829-1894), 557.
 —-- Sir Leslie, 561 _note_.
 Sterne, Laurence (1713-1768), 86-88, 176, 178, 363, 364, 435.
 Stevenson, Mr E., 426 _note_.
 —-- Robert Louis (1850-1894), 251, 494 _note_, 561 _note_.
 Stryienski, M., 135.
 _Studies in the History of the Renaissance_, 544 _sq._
 _Study of Celtic Literature, The_, 521 _sq._
 _Style, Lecture on_, Coleridge’s, 226 _sq._
 —-- De Quincey on, 481 _sq._
 Sulzer, Johann G. (1720-1779), 150, 365, 366.
 Swift, 176, 229, 443.
 Swiss-Saxon Quarrel, the, 27 _sq._
 Symonds, John Addington (1840-1893), 551, 552.

 _Table Talk_, Coleridge’s, 224 _sq._
 —-- Hazlitt’s, 261.
 Taillandier, Saint-René (1817-1879), 465, 466.
 Taine, Hippolyte Adolphe (1828-1893), 107, 307 _note_, 440-444.
 Talfourd, 283 _note_.
 Tasso, 76, 179.
 Tassoni, 35.
 Taylor, Bayard, 641 _note_.
 —-- William, “of Norwich” (1765-1836), 497.
 Tennyson, 225, 425 _sq._, 484, 502-507.
 Terence (Diderot on), 93, 94, 161.
 _Tertium Quid_, 559 _sq._
 Texte, Joseph (1865-1900), 97, 99, 107, 177 _note_, 462-464.
 Thackeray, William Makepeace (1811-1863), 98, 263, 452, 499-502, 555.
 Theocritus, 277.
 _Theophila_, 6 _note_.
 Thomson, James (I.), 176, 400.
 —-- James (II.) (1834-1882), 552, 553.
 Tickell, 58.
 Ticknor, George (1791-1871), 181, 348 _note_, 632.
 Tieck, Ludwig (1773-1853), 390, 391.
 Tollemache, Mrs L., 96 _note_.
 Traill, Henry Duff (1842-1900), 231, 232, 554-557.
 Trapp, 616.
 Tressan, Comte de, 177.
 _Tristram Shandy_, 86.
 Tyler, Professor, 631 _note_.

 Uhland, Johann Ludwig (1787-1862), 402, 403.
 Ulrici, 575.

 Vaughan, Professor, 274 _note_, 499.
 Venables, George Stovin (1810-1888), 557.
 Veuillot, Louis (1815-1883), 468, 469.
 Vico, Giambattista (1668-1744), 9 _note_, 146, 152-157, 185 _note_, 267
    _note_, 356 _note_, 589 _note_.
 Vida, 36.
 Vigny, Alfred de, 306 _note_.
 Villemain, Abel François (1790-1865), 126, 133-135, 327.
 Vinet, Alexandre R. (1797-1847), 592-594.
 Virgil, 115, _note_.
 Vitet, Louis (1802-1873), 300.
 Voltaire, 37, 77, 115, 125, 138, 176, 370.
 _Vorschule der Æsthetik_, 385.
 Voynich, Mr, viii.

 Wagner, 582 _sq._
 Wainewright, Thomas Griffiths (1794-1852), 266 _note_.
 Walpole, Horace, 52 _note_.
 Ward, Mr Humphry, his _English Poets_, 531 _sq._
 Warton, Joseph (1722-1800), 53, 66, 68, 279.
 —-- Thomas, the elder (1688?-1745), 616.
 —-- the younger (1728-1790), vii, 53, 68-72, 192, 616.
 Watson (the printer), 54.
 Weckerlin, G. R. (1584-1651), 17.
 Weise, Christian (1642-1708), 17, 18.
 Werenfels, Samuel (1625-1703), 17, 18.
 Wernicke, Christian (1661-1725), 17, 18.
 Wheeler, Benjamin, 616.
 Whipple, Edwin P. (1819-1886), 642, 643.
 Whitfeld, John, 616.
 Whitman, Walt (1819-1892), 640.
 Whittier, J. G., 641 _note_.
 Wilson, John, “Christopher North” (1785-1854), 412, 472-478, 486.
 Wieland, Christoph R. (1733-1813), 106, 359, 360, 385, 392, 400.
 _Wilhelm Meister_, 117, 361 _sq._
 _William Shakespeare_, 336 _sq._
 _Wither_, 242.
 Wolcot, John, “Peter Pindar” (1738-1819), 286 _sq._
 Wolf, 156.
 Wolff, 147.
 Wonderful, The, Bodmer on, 24 _sq._
 Wordsworth, William (1770-1850), 200-218, 229, 243, 249, 268, 290, 322,
    622 _sq._
 Woty, William (1731-1791), 6 _note_.
 Wrangham, Archdeacon, 201.
 Wright, Thomas (1810-1877), x, 283 _note_.
 Wynn, C. W., 234.
 .sp 1
 .ix
 _Xenien_, The, 380 _sq._

 Young, 176.

 Zesen, Philip von (1619-1689), 17.
 Zinano, vii.
 Zola, Émile (1840-1903), 454-458.
 Zürich School, the, Bk. vii. ch. ii. _passim_, 56.

                 PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

There is a section after the Preface which specifies corrections and
additions to be made in the current volume, as well as volumes 1 and 2.
These changes were _not_ made.

No attempt was made to check the validity of each index entry’s
references, however several of them seem spurious:

“Professor Pringle-Patterson” is referred to only in a note on p. 581,
      but the page mentioned in the Index is incorrectly given as p.
      514.

The entry for “Thomas Love Peacock” refers to a note on p. 207, but he
      is mentioned in none of those notes. He is, however, mentioned in
      a footnote on p. 162. The page number has been changed.

The second page reference (p. 137) for Adam Smith was incorrect. The
      correct page is p. 157, and has been changed.

                                 Notes

494.4: A passage (“What! ... in the “Bunyan”?) opens with a quotation
      mark, but employs a double quote for two quoted words, and fails
      to provide a closing quote.

160.11: The title of Hume’s “Essays: Moral, Political, and Literary” is
      partially italicized, with the last phrase in normal font as
      emphasis.

                              Corrections

Errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected, and
are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the original.

 16.33      die Anf[ang/änge] der literarischen Kritik     Replaced.

 20.4       _Historie der Deutschen Sprache[,] Poesie_     Added.

 24.13      philosophy from Leibni[t]z and Wolff           Added.

 26.39      Heilbron[n], 1883.                             Added.

 82.38      [(]_Power of Numbers_                          Removed.

 112.5      and perhaps to[o] hasty                        Added.

 133.41     [e]ven less of a critic “in his heart”         Restored.

 138.23     as little more than a boy[./,]                 Replaced.

 133.42     [th]an Cousin.                                 Restored.

 149.34     the old notion back again[,/.]                 Replaced.

 150.23     by her eighteenth-century writers[.]           Added.

 201.34     It is wi[s/d]ely usual                         Replaced.

 234.29     ii. 91[)]                                      Removed.

 243.9      “On Some Sonnets of Sir Philip Sidney[”]       Added.

 272.25     one of the least agree[e]able                  Removed.

 296.11     but in politics ecc[l]esiastical and civil     Inserted.

 320.18     the whole twelvemo[u/n]th                      Replaced.

 357.40     the so-called “British[’/”] or Miltonic        Replaced.
            scansion

 378.11     as Dryden’s or Corneill[l]e’s.                 Removed.

 394.6      rule the ro[a/o]st so absolutely               Replaced.

 401.21     “judging of books[”]                           Added.

 449.27     a very useful alter[n]ative                    Inserted.

 496.28     his strictly critical facul[i]ties             Removed.

 558.37     in a newspaper[.]                              Added.

 567.36     [“]Über Urtheil, Kritik, Beifall und Ruhren,”  Added.

 617.47     for his grandsire or his dam[.]                Added.
